IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN APPLIED EARTH OBSERVATIONS AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 18, 2025
8897
Individual Tree Segmentation Based on
Region-Growing and Density-Guided Canopy 3-D
Morphology Detection Using UAV LiDAR Data
Shihua Li
, Senior Member, IEEE, Shunda Zhao, Zhilin Tian
, Hao Tang
, Student Member, IEEE,
and Zhonghua Su
Abstract—Foresttreeinformationiscrucialformonitoringforest
resources and developing forestry management strategies. Air-
borne laser scanning is an efﬁcient and rapid method for acquiring
3-D point cloud data of forests, making up for the shortcomings
of optical remote sensing. Especially for unmanned aircraft ve-
hicle laser scanning, the high-density point cloud provides the
possibility of a detailed depiction of forest structures. Extracting
individual trees from point cloud data is a prerequisite for ﬁne
forestry research. Currently, existing methods fail to fully utilize
the height information, density information, and vertical structure
details of tree crowns within point cloud data, resulting in complex
algorithmic processes and reduced reliability. This study proposes
a novel method that combines the canopy height model (CHM)
and point cloud data for segmenting individual trees and employs
height and density information for morphological detection of tree
canopies. First, based on CHM-based segmentation, the point cloud
density feature is introduced to identify the wrong segmented
trees. Next, the height and density information are combined to
guide the selection of vertical proﬁles. Finally, a 3-D morphological
detection is conducted on the proﬁles to extract the potential trees.
We validate the accuracy of the method on German forests. The
results indicated that the average F1-scores of six study plots were
0.95, which improved by 5% after the introduction of density
information. The primary source of errors was the irregularity of
tree morphology. Our method produced reasonable results across
different parameter settings, demonstrating its insensitivity to pa-
rameter conﬁgurations.
Index Terms—Density, individual tree segmentation, morpho-
logy,regiongrowing,unmannedaerialvehicle(UAV)lightdetection
and ranging (LiDAR).
Received 3 June 2024; revised 17 January 2025; accepted 16 February 2025.
Date of publication 28 February 2025; date of current version 7 April 2025. This
work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under
Grant 42371382 and Grant 41871247. (Corresponding author: Shihua Li.)
Shihua Li is with the School of Resources and Environment, University of
Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China, and also
with the Technology Innovation Center for Southwest Land Space Ecological
Restoration and Comprehensive Renovation, Ministry of Natural Resources,
Chengdu 610045, China (e-mail: lishihua@uestc.edu.cn).
Shunda Zhao, Zhilin Tian, and Hao Tang are with the School of Resources
and Environment, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
Chengdu611731,China(e-mail:1014728566@qq.com;1114073951@qq.com;
tangh@std.uestc.edu.cn).
Zhonghua
Su
is
with
the
School
of
Computer
and
Software
Engineering,
Xihua
University,
Chengdu
610039,
China
(e-mail:
suzhonghua@mail.xhu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/JSTARS.2025.3546651
I. INTRODUCTION
F
ORESTS are important terrestrial ecosystems and natural
resources [1]. Providing accurate and up-to-date forest
survey data is important for achieving dynamic monitoring of
forest resources and formulating reasonable forest management
policies [2]. The traditional forestry survey methods are mainly
manual ﬁeld surveys, which are not only human resources-
consuming but also challenging to cover large forest areas [3].
In addition, it may be limited by ﬁeld conditions, such as terrain
obstruction and protected areas off-limits, and cannot conduct a
comprehensive survey of all trees [4]. Over the past four decades,
remote sensing (RS) technology has been extensively utilized in
large-scale forest surveys to gather information on electromag-
netic radiation from target objects through noncontact remote
detection [5], [6].
Individual tree parameter surveys are the basis of forest
resources surveys, which can obtain accurate forest structural
parameters (e.g., height, crown width, and diameter at breast
height) or estimate related attributes by building regression
models (e.g., aboveground biomass and leaf area index) [7].
Therefore, individual tree segmentation becomes a prerequisite
for highly accurate estimation of forestry parameters. Airborne
laser scanning (ALS) can rapidly acquire large areas of highly
accurate 3-D structure information for forest surveys. Moreover,
compared with other optical RS means, the light detection and
ranging (LiDAR) system can penetrate the forest canopy by ac-
tively emitting laser pulses, and thus obtain the internal structure
information of the forest [8], [9], [10]. Unfortunately, the high
equipment and operational costs of ALS have restricted its use in
forest inventories [11]. In recent years, unmanned aerial vehicle
(UAV), with its advantages of low cost, easy operation, and high
ﬂexibility,isgraduallybecominganewmeansforforestresource
surveys [12], [13], [14]. UAV LiDAR can acquire high-density
point cloud data, allowing for a detailed depiction of canopy
structure [15]. Moreover, in dense forests, it can obtain more
accurate 3-D terrain information and avoid data errors caused
by uneven terrain.
The individual tree segmentation methods for UAV LiDAR
point clouds are mainly categorized into raster-based and point-
basedapproaches.Theideaoftheraster-basedmethodistoapply
image segmentation techniques to the LiDAR-derived raster
images to segment individual tree canopies. These methods
© 2025 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/


8898
IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN APPLIED EARTH OBSERVATIONS AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 18, 2025
typically begin by employing a Gaussian ﬁlter to smooth the
canopy height model (CHM). Then, a local maximum ﬁlter is
used to search for local maximum points as tree top points.
Each of these local maximum points is either marked as the
initial region for the region-growing algorithm [16], [17] or
used as markers in the watershed algorithm to simulate water
injection [3], [18], [19]. However, the reliability of tree top lo-
calization depends heavily on the local maximum ﬁlter window
size [20]. Some researchers address this issue by adaptively
determining the ﬁlter window size. For example, Chen et al.
[21] constructed a regression equation between canopy size
and tree height to determine variable window size, resulting in
an overall accuracy of 64.1%. Dong et al. [22] assumed the
potential trees to be approximately conical and detected them
using gradient orientation clustering, avoided manual setting
of threshold parameters, and achieved the highest matching
score (RMS_M = 43). Considering the limited segmentation
capability of the CHM-based method in high-density forests,
Ma et al. [23] proposed a vegetation point cloud density model
(PDM) for high-density point cloud data to segment the indi-
vidual tree, achieving comparable performance to CHM. The
raster-based method is computationally efﬁcient, but there is a
loss of information in generating a raster from point cloud data,
and this method usually oversegments the tree canopies with
multiple peaks.
The point-based method is mainly according to the 3-D
spatial distribution and the vertical structural features described
by the multiple echo information, using clustering algorithms,
such as voxel-based clustering [24], region growing [25], [26],
K-means [27], [28] and mean-shift [9], [29], [30], to complete
the segmentation. The point cloud-based region-growing algo-
rithm is a top-down approach that designates the locally highest
points as tree top points and assigns the remaining points to
the correct tree based on their spatial relationship with the trees
[26]. In general, this method will underestimate the number of
trees. The point-based method has lower information loss and
also provides opportunities for the segmentation of multilayer
forests. Ferraz et al. [31] ﬁrst deﬁned the forest layer and then
used a mean-shift algorithm to complete the clustering of trees.
Dai et al. [29] combined spatial information and multispectral
information using a mean-shift algorithm for tree detection. But,
the mean-shift algorithm with ﬁxed bandwidth is usually not
satisfactory. Establishing an adaptive estimation of the band-
width can improve the segmentation accuracy [9], [30]. To
lessen the effect of tree spatial distribution on the algorithm,
density features of point clouds are proved to be a solution [32],
[33]. Point-based algorithms avoid information loss during the
interpolation of point clouds to generate CHM and have high
segmentation accuracy, but their high computational load and
time consumption limit their application.
Some researchers have now proposed individual tree segmen-
tation methods that fuse raster and point. The idea of this type
of method is to obtain initial individual trees by a raster-based
method, and then reﬁne them according to the distribution of
point clouds within or between trees. Yang et al. [3] used the wa-
tershed algorithm to extract initial trees from the CHM and then
used the K-means algorithm for ﬁne segmentation. However,
the K-means algorithm cannot account for the different sizes of
canopies and irregular shapes. Hui et al. [34] ﬁrst segmented the
initial trees using the watershed algorithm and multiscale fusion
and then searched for the junction of the two trees according
to the probability density function. However, this method often
requires the manual setting of numerous parameters to determine
whether the initial individual trees are correct, and the process
is complex, resulting in lower reliability in complex forest
areas.
To address the limited segmentation capability of existing
methods in forests, this article proposed a novel method for
individual tree segmentation by combining CHM-based and
point-based methods. Instead of based on the 2-D projection
morphology of the individual trees, we applied the local density
maxima points to identify incorrect initial trees. Then we cor-
rected the erroneous trees according to the 3-D morphology of
the point cloud within the segments. We validated the proposed
method on German forest data provided by Weiser et al. [35].
The main contributions of this article are as follows.
1) We propose a new method based on CHM and point cloud
to segment individual trees, which utilizes the advantages
of high efﬁciency of CHM and high accuracy of point
cloud. This approach circumvents the information loss in
CHM methods and the signiﬁcant computational burden
of point cloud methods.
2) The study investigates the height and density features of
forest canopies and analyzes their contribution to individ-
ual tree segmentation. It also analyzes the morphological
features of overlapping canopies and proposes different
segmentation strategies for overlapping tree crowns based
on their relative distances.
3) Innovatively combining point cloud density information
and height information for ﬁne segmentation. Density
information accurately identiﬁes undersegmentation and
oversegmentation and also guides the selection of vertical
proﬁles, thus eliminating the cumbersome judgment pro-
cess and improving segmentation capability. The contribu-
tion of density information to segmentation is evaluated.
II. DATA
A. Study Area
In this study, the dataset provided by Weiser et al. [35]
contains 12 plots in 2 forests. Both study areas are located in
the temperate forest region of Baden-Württemberg, Germany,
namely the Bretten municipal forest (49°00′36′′N, 8°41′35′′E)
and the Hardtwald forest in Karlsruhe-Waldstadt (49°02′04′′N,
8°25′40′′E), as shown in Fig. 1. The Bretten site is located in
the hilly landscape of the Kraichgau and the main tree species
are European beech (Fagus sylvatica L.), Norway spruce (Picea
abies (L.) H. Karst), Douglas ﬁr (Pseudotsuga Menziesii (Mirb.)
Franco.), sessile oak (Quercus Petraea (Matt.) Liebl.), and Eu-
ropean hornbeam (Carpinus Betulus L.). The Karlsruhe site is
located on the ﬂat terrain of the Upper Rhine Plain and the main
tree species are Scots pine (Pinus sylvestris L.), red oak (Quercus
rubra L.), and European beech [35].


LI et al.: INDIVIDUAL TREE SEGMENTATION BASED ON REGION-GROWING AND DENSITY-GUIDED
8899
TABLE I
FLYING HEIGHT, SPEED, MEAN POINT CLOUD DENSITY, AND PLOT AREAS FOR THE SIX PLOTS [35]
Fig. 1.
Location of the area in Karlsruhe (left) and Bretten (right) in the federal
state of Baden-Württemberg, Germany [35]. The extent of the six plots is marked
in yellow.
B. UAV LiDAR Data
The UAV LiDAR dataset was acquired with a RIEGL
miniVUX-1UAV sensor mounted on a DJI Matrice 600 Pro
hexacopter. The parameters of the scanner are as follows: laser
pulse repetition rate up to 100 kHz, up to ﬁve target echoes per
laser shot, and laser wavelength in near-infrared. Considering
to validate the robustness of the method under different forest
conditions, experiments in six plots (BR03, BR05, BR07 BR08,
KA09, and KA11) were conducted. The ﬂights were performed
on August 24, 2019, May 26, 2020, September 13, 2019, and
September6,2019[35].TableIshowsﬂyingheight,speed,mean
point cloud density, and plot areas for the six plots.
III. METHOD
This study proposes a tree segmentation method based on
CHM and point cloud data, which consists of four main steps.
1) Preprocessing and generation of raster: Ground points
andnongroundpointsareseparatedbypointcloudﬁltering
to generate CHM and PDM.
2) Coarse segmentation based on region-growing algorithm:
The initial segmentation is derived from the CHM through
a region-growing algorithm and used as the basis for
subsequent segmenting.
3) Classifyerroneoussegmentedtreesbasedonlocaldensity:
The coarse segmentations are classiﬁed into correct and
over- and undersegmentation according to the number of
local density maximum points.
4) Fine segmentation based on canopy 3-D morphology:
The error trees are corrected based on 2-D projection
morphology and upper surface morphology of the canopy
in vertical proﬁle. Fig. 2 shows the framework of the
methods in this article.
A. Preprocessing and Generation of Raster
The preprocessing aims to mitigate the effects of topographic
relief on the point cloud, ensuring that the z-value of each
point accurately reﬂects its height above the ground. The cloth
simulation ﬁltering (CSF) algorithm [36] ﬁrst turns the point
cloud upside down, then a cloth drops to the inverted surface,
and ground and nonground points are distinguished according
to the ﬁnal shape of the cloth. It has become one of the most
popular point cloud ﬁltering algorithms with fewer parameters,
easier setup, and higher accuracy. We ﬁrst applied denoising
and CSF algorithms to the raw point cloud to extract the ground
points. A digital elevation model (DEM) was generated from
the ground points by inverse distance weighted interpolation,
and a digital surface model (DSM) was generated using the ﬁrst
echoes of the nonground points. The raster cell size was set at
0.5 m × 0.5 m. The DEM was subtracted from the DSM to get a
CHM to eliminate the effect of terrain undulations. Since there
may be noise in the CHM, which will affect the accuracy of the
subsequent segmentation, a Gaussian ﬁlter (sigma is set 1) was
used to smooth the CHM. Then, the normalized point cloud was
obtained by subtraction of the corresponding raster value in the
DEM from the elevation of each point.
Point cloud density refers to the number of laser point pro-
jections per unit horizontal plane area. All the nonground points
were projected onto a 2-D horizontal surface, and the horizontal
surface was divided into a number of square grids with equal
side lengths, and the count of projected points falling within each
square grid was recorded as the value of the grid to construct
a PDM. In this article, the grid size was set to 0.5 m × 0.5 m.
Similarly, we applied a Gaussian ﬁlter to smooth PDM.


8900
IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN APPLIED EARTH OBSERVATIONS AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 18, 2025
Fig. 2.
Flowchart of the proposed method.
Fig. 3.
Example of the region-growing result. The red points indicate the
extracted tree tops and the blue polygons indicate the tree crowns. (a) Tree tops
derived from the local maximum ﬁlter. (b) Crown delineated by region-growing
algorithm.
B. Coarse Segmentation Based on Region-Growing Algorithm
For each region, the region-growing algorithm should ﬁrst
designate a seed point as the starting of the growth, and then
compare the raster in the neighborhood with the seed point,
merging the points that meet certain conditions [37]. The al-
gorithm continues to grow outward by repeating this process
until no pixels meet the conditions. First, detect potential tree
tops by applying a local maximum ﬁlter with a ﬁxed kernel size
of 5 pixels. In Fig. 3(a), the tree tops are marked in red. These
potential tree top points were then used as seed points for canopy
growth.Wedeterminewhetheraneighboringpixelpointbelongs
to the growing canopy based on the following three conditions.
1) The height of the neighboring pixel is higher than the seed
height ∗0.6 and lower than the seed height ∗1.05.
2) The height of the neighboring pixel is higher than the mean
height of the current crown ∗0.6.
3) The maximum radius of the current canopy does not
exceed 10 m.
We set these parameters according to the R-package itcSeg-
ment [38] and adjusted some of them based on the suggestions
of Dalponte and Coomes [17] and Zörner et al. [16]. All pixels
that meet the above three conditions are grouped into the same
canopy. During the process of growing outward from the seed
point, we deﬁned a circular-like kernel function, instead of using
a traditional n × n kernel function. This allows the canopy to
grow outward from the seed point in a circle-like shape rather
than in the traditional quadrilateral shape, which can better
simulate the shape of the canopy. In Fig. 3(b), the tree crowns
are marked in blue polygons. We add all the tree tops to a list.
C. Classify Erroneous Segmented Trees Based on Local
Density
In coarse segmentation, we used a local maximum ﬁlter with
a ﬁxed window size to search for potential tree tops. How-
ever, the window size setting largely affects the performance
of the ﬁltering. If the ﬁltering window size is smaller, more
local maxima can be detected, but trees with larger canopies
may be recognized as multiple trees. In contrast, if the ﬁlter
window size is larger, fewer local maxima can be detected,
but small trees may not be identiﬁed and merged into a larger
canopy. Particularly in dense forests with closely spaced trees,
the CHM-based method usually treats the clustered trees as one
tree, producing undersegmentation. In the subsequent session,
the erroneous segmented trees are found by density informa-
tion, and then their morphology is analyzed to correct them.
This can address the issue of poor segmentation accuracy in
densely packed forests to some extent. In general, there is a
correlation between crown size and tree height, so an adaptive
ﬁlter window can be set according to tree height to improve the
accuracy of tree tops search [39]. However, its capability relies
signiﬁcantly on the regression model correlating tree height
with crown width. To address these challenges, we performed
error identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation on the segmented clusters
after coarse segmentation. Then, we conducted ﬁne segmen-
tation according to the 3-D morphology analysis of the point
cloud.


LI et al.: INDIVIDUAL TREE SEGMENTATION BASED ON REGION-GROWING AND DENSITY-GUIDED
8901
Fig. 4.
Example of the local height maximum and local density maximum
for an individual tree. Triangles represent points of local height maxima and
squares represent points of local density maxima. (a) Frontal perspective of the
tree point cloud. (b) CHM of the tree.
The tree top in a forest can be considered as a multimodal
distribution, with each tree top having a local maximum in
both height and density, corresponding to a canopy apex [31].
Fig. 4 shows the distribution of local height maxima and local
density maxima for the two trees. From Fig. 4, it can be found
that for trees with regular shapes, the positions of their local
maximum density and local maximum height in the horizontal
direction nearly coincide. Therefore, undersegmented trees can
be identiﬁed by assessing the number of points exhibiting local
density maxima within each coarsely segmented cluster. Similar
to the CHM-based tree top detection in Section III-B, we apply a
local maximum ﬁlter to extract points representing local density
maxima on the PDM. The coarse-segmented trees were then
classiﬁed based on the following rules.
1) If there is only one local density maximum point in a
segmented tree, it is considered a correct individual tree.
2) If a coarsely segmented tree does not have any local
density maximum points, it is classiﬁed as a potential
oversegmented tree.
3) If there are two or more local density maxima in a coarse-
segmentation tree, it is classiﬁed as a potential underseg-
mented tree and these local density maximum points are
recorded for subsequent ﬁne segmentation.
D. Fine Segmentation Based on 3-D Morphology
Oversegmentation cluster is usually a part of an individual
tree and is typically not circular but elliptical or elongated in
shape. Therefore, we can determine if the oversegmentation
cluster is correct based on the shape of its projection plane. We
ﬁrst projected all points in the cluster onto the xoy 2-D plane to
obtain the point set P, and then computed the covariance matrix
Fig. 5.
Example of singular value decomposition. a represents the length of
the major axis, and b represents the length of the minor axis.
cov of P as follows:
cov =
1
n −1 (P −¯p) (P −¯p)T
(1)
where n is the number of the P, and ¯p is the mean of each
dimension of the P.
The singular value decomposition is then performed on cov
to obtain two eigenvalues λ1 and λ2 (λ1 > λ2) and their cor-
responding eigenvectors α1 and α2. The eigenvector α1 was
used as the x-axis, and the eigenvector α2 was used as the
y-axis. Subsequently, all points are individually projected onto
the x-axis and y-axis, as shown in Fig. 5. The length of the
majoraxisiscalculatedasthelongestdistancebetweenprojected
points on the x-axis, and the same approach is employed to
determine the length of the minor axis. If the ratio of the length of
the major axis to the minor axis is greater than 3 [40], the cluster
is considered an oversegmented cluster. It was then assigned to
the cluster that had the nearest top to that cluster top and removed
that tree top from the list. Otherwise, the segmentation cluster
is considered correct.
For potential undersegmented clusters, since each cluster has
multiple local density maxima, we only need to determine
whether these local density maxima are the tree tops of the
unsegmented tree. In general, the boundary between two tree
crowns is a local height minimum, the two tree tops are the local
height maximum. The point cloud height shows a trend of ﬁrst
decreasing from one tree top to another and then increasing. As
shown in Fig. 6(a) and (e), the green points represent underseg-
mented trees, and it can be clearly seen that they are consistent
with the above trend.


8902
IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN APPLIED EARTH OBSERVATIONS AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 18, 2025
Fig. 6.
Example of density-guided point cloud 3-D morphological detection.
(a) and (e) Undersegmented trees. (b) and (f) Positioning vertical proﬁle. (c) and
(g) Vertical proﬁle analysis. (d) and (h) Results of ﬁne segmentation.
We searched for the highest points as potential tree top points
within a 0.5 m radius around each local density maximum point.
With the highest point as a reference, we evaluated whether
each other potential tree top point meets the above-mentioned
relationship. First, we found the plane passing through two
points and perpendicular to the xoy plane. The equation of the
plane is as follows:
ax + by + c = 0.
(2)
As shown in Fig. 6(b) and (f), the triangles represent the
highest points of the clusters, the squares represent the potential
tree tops found by the local density maxima, and the red dot
lines represent the vertical proﬁles through these two points. We
then projected all the points in the segmented cluster onto the
plane, whose distance to the plane was less than 0.2 m, to get the
vertical proﬁle. The equation for the distance between the point
(xp, yp, zp) and the plane is as follows:
Dp = |axp + byp + c|
√
a2 + b2
.
(3)
Next, we extracted the surface points from the proﬁle at
given intervals to simulate the crown surface. These points were
subjected to polynomial ﬁtting to obtain the canopy surface
morphology ﬁtting function. The vertical proﬁle ﬁt is shown
in Fig. 6(c) and (g), the black points represent the ﬁt points and
the blue lines represent the canopy surface ﬁtting curve. The
ﬁtted polynomial function is as follows:
p (x) = p1 xn + p2xn−1 + . . . + pnx + pn+1
(4)
where n is the degree of the polynomial and pi(i = 1,2,...,n+1)
are the coefﬁcient of a polynomial.
The point of height minimum between two tree tops in the
ﬁtting function is considered as the boundary point between
the two tree crowns. To ﬁnd the minimum point of p(x),
we calculated its ﬁrst-order derivatives p′(x) and second-order
derivatives p′′(x). If p′ (x0) = 0 and p′′(x0) > 0, then x0 is the
Fig. 7.
3-D morphological detection. Red arrows represent canopy trends, H
is the tree height, and D is the distance from the top of the tree to the boundary
line.
minimum point. The functions are as follows:
p′ (x) = dp (x)
dx
= np1 xn−1 + (n −1) p2xn−2 + . . . + pn
(5)
p′′ (x) = dp
′(x)
dx
= n (n −1) p1 xn−2 + . . . + pn−1.
(6)
When the height difference between these two tops is small,
it can be considered that these two trees are of similar size.
Ideally, their boundary point should be located near the middle
of the two tops. As shown in Fig. 7(a), there are two overlapping
trees (A and B) with similar heights. There is a certain distance
between their tree tops, and the distances DA and DB to the
boundary line are roughly similar. We should also consider the
presence of branches. Branches can appear similar to a nearby
undersegmented tree in terms of height, but their planar distance
is close. As shown in Fig. 7(c), there is only one tree, including
its trunk and branches. The presence of branches makes the
morphology of the tree top similar to that in Fig. 7(a), but the
difference is that the distance between the trunk and the branches
in the plane is much smaller. In Fig. 7(b), there is a tall tree and
a short tree. Due to the signiﬁcant height difference, if there
is a descending trend followed by an ascending trend, it can
be considered that the short tree is undersegmented. Therefore,
when the height difference between the two tops is less than
1 m, it can be considered that the point does not belong to an
undersegmented tree if the planar distance between them is less
than 2 m, or if the ratio of the distances to boundary point is
greater than 1.5. Otherwise, if the height of the boundary point
is lower than the height of the shortest top, the point is considered
to be the top point of the undersegmented tree and added to the
tree top list. As shown in Fig. 6(c) and (g), the undersegmented


LI et al.: INDIVIDUAL TREE SEGMENTATION BASED ON REGION-GROWING AND DENSITY-GUIDED
8903
Fig. 8.
3-D display of segmentation results. (a)–(f) represent plots 1–6.
trees are successfully detected, the green points represent the
detected tree tops, the yellow points represent the boundary point
between two trees, and the red dot lines represent the splitting
line for segmenting the two individual trees. Fig. 6(d) and (h)
show the results of reﬁnement for these trees. The red and blue
points represent corrected trees, and the black points represent
the reﬁned tree tops. Within each undersegmented cluster, we
analyzed all potential tree tops according to the above rule with
reference top points and updated the list.
Finally, we utilized the updated list of tree tops as seed points
and applied them to the region-growing algorithm described in
Section III-B to obtain the ﬁnal individual trees. Fig. 8 shows
the individual trees extracted from the ﬁne segmentation of six
plots. In each plot, every tree has been assigned a distinct color
for visualization.
E. Evaluation
We manually extracted individual trees from the test plots as
reference trees using LiDAR360 (Green Valley International,
Ltd., Merced, CA, USA). If the planar distance between the
extracted tree tops and the reference tree tops is less than 0.5 m
and the difference in their heights is less than 5%, the two trees
are considered to be successfully matched. In this article, the tree
is deﬁned as a matched tree if it can ﬁnd a matching reference
tree. The tree is deﬁned as an oversegmented tree if its top lies
within a reference tree, but that reference tree has already been
matched. If a reference tree cannot ﬁnd a matching tree, the tree
is deﬁned as an undersegmented tree. Five accuracy indicators
were used for accuracy evaluation, including extraction rate
(ER), matching rate (MR), commission rate (CR), omission rate
(OR), and F1-score. The equations are as follows:
ER = TP + FP
TP + FN
(7)
MR =
TP
TP + FN
(8)
CR =
FP
TP + FP
(9)
OR =
FN
TP + FN
(10)
r =
TP
TP + FN
(11)
p =
TP
TP + FP
(12)
F1 = 2 r ∗p
r + p
(13)
where TP is the number of matched trees, FN is the number of
undersegmented trees, and FP is the number of oversegmented
trees.
ER measures the ability to extract trees from the data, MR
measures the ability to correctly match ﬁeld trees among ex-
tracted trees. CR measures the error of incorrectly extracting
a tree that does not exist, OR measures the error of omission
caused by the lack of recognition tree, and the F1-score is used
to comprehensively evaluate the performance of an algorithm.
Inaddition,wealsocomparedwithfourotherairborneLiDAR
individual tree segmentation algorithms. They are the marker-
controlled watershed approach (MCW) [21], the point cloud-
based cluster segmentation (PCS) [26], the Nyström-based spec-
tral clustering method (NSC) [41], and the density-based method
(ITDW) [32]. Considering the high density of UAV LiDAR point
clouds, the comparative shortest-path algorithm (CSP) [42] for
terrestrial LiDAR data was also compared.
Finally, we also performed ablation experiments on two im-
portant parameters, which were the local height maximum ﬁlter
window size for CHM and the local density maximum ﬁlter
window size for PDM.
IV. RESULTS
A. Individual Tree Detection
Fig. 9 shows the individual tree segmentation results in six
plots using the proposed method. In Fig. 9, the coarse-segmented
trees, ﬁne-segmented trees, and reference trees are represented
by blue triangles, red diamonds, and black circles. It is shown
that many trees were not correctly extracted by the coarse


8904
IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN APPLIED EARTH OBSERVATIONS AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 18, 2025
TABLE II
FIVE ACCURACY INDICATORS OF THE PROPOSED METHOD
Fig. 9.
Individual tree segmentation results by the proposed method. Blue
triangles represent the coarse-segmented trees, red diamonds represent the ﬁne-
segmented trees, and black circles represent the reference trees.
segmentation. However, most of these missing trees were suc-
cessfully extracted by ﬁne segmentation. It means that after ﬁne
segmentation, most of the trees were extracted correctly.
The ﬁve accuracy indicators of the six plots are shown in
Table II. From Table II, it can be seen that compared to coarse
segmentation, ﬁne segmentation has signiﬁcant improvements
in both the extraction rate and matching rate by an average of
TABLE III
COMPARISON OF AVERAGE ACCURACY INDICATORS OF SIX METHODS
16% and 12%, respectively. Additionally, there is a signiﬁcant
decrease in the omission rate by an average of 12%, and a small
increase in the commission rate and F1-score by an average of
4% and 5%, respectively. The extraction rates for all six sample
plots are close to 1. Although plot 5 has the lowest F1-score,
it still reaches 0.88. It is worth noting that the omission rate in
plot 5 is signiﬁcantly higher compared to the other plots, which
results in the lower F1-score in plot 5.
B. Comparison of Methods
The comparison of MCW, PCS, NSC, ITDW, CSP, and the
method of this article (RDT) are shown in Table III. It is worth
noting that due to the high density of the UAV LiDAR point
cloud, we resampled the raw point cloud data to 11 pts/m2 as
input data for the NSC and ITDW methods. It is evident that the
method of this article achieves the best results in all accuracy
metrics and has the highest average F1-score of 0.95. The ITDW
method achieved the same optimal results as the method of this
article in terms of matching rate and omission rate. The NSC
method had the lowest F1-score, mainly due to the generation
of too many oversegmentation errors, which is consistent with
the ﬁndings of Hui et al. [34]. The CSP method generates a
signiﬁcant amount of oversegmentation, primarily due to the


LI et al.: INDIVIDUAL TREE SEGMENTATION BASED ON REGION-GROWING AND DENSITY-GUIDED
8905
TABLE IV
EFFICIENCY COMPARISON OF THE SIX METHODS ON PLOT 1
interference of understory vegetation affecting the detection of
tree trunks.
Table IV lists the runtime of these six methods in plot 1.
The computer used to run the six algorithms had the following
speciﬁcations: Windows 10, Intel Core i7-9700K processor, and
32 GB RAM. No GPU acceleration was used. Except for NSC
and ITDW, which used resampled data, the other four methods
used the raw data. For the method of this article, we separately
calculated the runtime for the coarse segmentation and ﬁne
segmentation stages. Furthermore, at each stage, we separately
calculated the runtime for scenarios with point cloud storage and
without point cloud storage. The results indicate that the MCW
method has the shortest runtime, showcasing the advantage of
the raster-based approach. The method of this article consumes a
lot of time in storing the point cloud but is efﬁcient in segmenting
the point cloud.
V. DISCUSSION
A. Advantages of Density Guidance
The method in this article consists of two steps. The ﬁrst is the
coarse segmentation based on CHM, and the second is the ﬁne
segmentation based on points using the results of the coarse seg-
mentation. While the CHM-based algorithm is fast and efﬁcient,
it can suffer from omission errors [7]. The CHM-based method
utilizes the height information of the canopy, and the accuracy of
this algorithm mainly depends on the detection accuracy of the
tree top points. In plots where the distribution of trees is more
sparsely dispersed and the distance between each tree is larger,
the highest point of each canopy is more obvious and easier to
detect. In this case, the CHM-based method can often achieve
high accuracy [3], [19]. However, in plots with more trees and
a more concentrated distribution, the distance between trees is
smaller and a larger area of overlap between canopies occurs,
which can be a challenge for tree tops detection. In addition,
taller trees may overshadow and obstruct the surrounding shorter
trees, resulting in omissions where the highest points of the
shorter tree canopies cannot be detected [43]. Fig. 6(a) and (e)
shows two neighboring trees in the test plot, where one tree is
taller with a larger crown, and is correctly segmented, while
Fig. 10.
Example of leaning tree. The black dotted line indicates the tilted
direction. (a) Tilted whole tree. (b) Tilted tree crown. (c) CHM image of a tilted
tree. (d) Vertical proﬁle curve ﬁtting.
the other tree is shorter, almost obscured, and is not correctly
segmented.
In general, the density peaks at the tree center and gradually
diminishes towards the tree edges [32], [44]. Density informa-
tion can compensate for the limitations of height information,
especially in plots that are heavily shaded by trees. Even if
smaller trees are obscured and unable to be explored to the tree
top, they can still be detected with the local density maxima.
Some methods cut point cloud clusters into several proﬁles with
certain angular intervals and ﬁnd potential tree top points in each
proﬁle [3], [7]. These methods rely on manually set parameters,
which may miss tree top points if not set properly, and the com-
putational process is complex. In contrast, compared to coarse
segmentation, which does not take any density information into
account, ﬁne segmentation shows signiﬁcant improvement in
both extraction rate and matching rate, with increases of 16%
and 12%, respectively. The F1-score has also improved by 5%.
Although the ﬁne segmentation is mainly based on point cloud
processing, it is extremely efﬁcient without storing the point
cloud, taking only a few seconds. This indicates that our method,
guided by density information, can quickly and accurately detect
tree tops in shaded trees, greatly simplifying the computational
process and improving the detection accuracy.
B. Inﬂuence of Canopy Structure
Forest structure is the primary factor that determines the
accuracy of individual tree segmentation results [45]. The


8906
IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN APPLIED EARTH OBSERVATIONS AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 18, 2025
Fig. 11.
Effect of local height maximum ﬁlter window size on segmentation results.
Fig. 12.
Effect of local density maximum ﬁlter window size on segmentation results.
method of this article has good segmentation accuracy in conif-
erous forests where the canopy shape is nearly conical but is
less adaptable in broadleaf forests with more complex canopy
shapes. On the one hand, the leaves of deciduous trees have
a large surface area, which forms a shade layer on the canopy
surface,greatlyweakeningthepenetratingabilityoflaserbeams,
resulting in an inability to reﬂect the canopy’s structural infor-
mation accurately based on point cloud density. On the other
hand, deciduous trees often have multiple branches, forming a
multicentered canopy structure, which results in multiple local


LI et al.: INDIVIDUAL TREE SEGMENTATION BASED ON REGION-GROWING AND DENSITY-GUIDED
8907
height maxima and local density maxima for a single tree, which
interferes with segmentation. Meanwhile, the scanning method
of the UAV LiDAR system is top-down, and the point cloud
informationismainlyconcentratedatthetopoftheforestcanopy
and decreases with decreasing height. Therefore, the individual
tree segmentation method based on UAV LiDAR point cloud
data also adopts a top-down approach to maximize the advantage
of the rich information in the upper layer of the canopy while
neglecting the information in the lower layer of the canopy.
In multilayer forests, it is difﬁcult for UAV LiDAR to acquire
information about the lower forest due to the shading of the
upper forest canopy, which leads to the difﬁculty of extracting
the trees of the lower forest by the morphology-based method.
To further explore the inﬂuence of canopy structure on the
methods in this article, we checked plot 5, which had the poorest
segmentation results. By examining the incorrectly segmented
trees in plot 5, we found that most of these trees were not
growing upright, but had varying degrees of inversion, as shown
in Fig. 10(a). There were also some trees that may have been
affected by the wind and had a uniform crown tilted in one
direction, as shown in Fig. 10(b). This irregular canopy struc-
ture has two effects on the segmentation results. On the one
hand, shorter trees can be completely obscured by nearby taller
trees with a high degree of fall, resulting in omission error
as the CHM-based method can only detect the taller canopy.
On the other hand, a leaning canopy may disrupt the density
distribution of the canopy point cloud, resulting in local density
maximum points in the canopy deviating from the treetop points
or producing multiple local density maximum points, leading to
commission error. Fig. 10(c) shows the corresponding CHM
image for Fig. 10(a). Although the density maximum point of
the second tree is detected, the point is severely deviated from
the corresponding tree top due to tilting and the shorter tree
top is completely occluded, which cannot be detected by the
vertical proﬁle ﬁtting, as shown in Fig. 10(d) resulting in an
undersegmentation error.
C. Inﬂuence of the Parameter Setting
Morphology-based methods inevitably set a series of pa-
rameters for judgment when recognizing the morphological
features of images and points, and the accuracy of the results
of morphology-based methods is closely related to the setting of
parameters [46]. In other words, the optimal parameter settings
in one scene may not yield satisfactory results in another scene.
Parameter settings have a substantial impact on CHM-based
methods, and the window size is the most critical parameter.
A large window makes the canopy height variation of CHM
smoother and reduces the number of detected trees, whereas
a small window increases the number of detected trees. Point-
based methods also require appropriate parameter settings. A
small two-tree distance threshold is more sensitive to small trees
butmaydetectsomebranchesastrees. Alargedistancethreshold
is less likely to misidentify but is prone to omissions.
To verify the effect of parameter settings on ﬁne segmentation
results, we conducted experiments in plots 2, 3, 4, and 5, as these
plots have the most trees, the most complex stands, and different
seasonal conditions, respectively. The most critical parameters
are the local height maximum ﬁlter window size for CHM and
the local density maximum ﬁlter window size for PDM, which
determine the number of trees detected in the coarse and ﬁne
segmentation, respectively. We set the local height maximum
ﬁlter window size to 3, 5, and 7, and the local density maximum
ﬁlter window size to 4, 6, 8, and 10, respectively. The two sets of
experiments were independent of each other, and the accuracy
indicators for each different window size were calculated, as
shown in Figs. 11 and 12.
As shown in Fig. 11, with the increase in the window size of
the local height maximum ﬁlter, there is a noticeable decrease
in the extraction rate, a clear increase in the omission rate, but
the F1-score remains stable. This indicates that segmentation
accuracy is not highly sensitive to the window size of the local
height maximum ﬁlter. In contrast, the window size of the local
density maximum ﬁlter has a signiﬁcant impact on the results. As
shown in Fig. 12, as the window size increases, the extraction
rate and commission rate decrease signiﬁcantly, the omission
increases, and the matching rate decreases. That is because the
smaller the window size, the more local density maximum points
detected, which means that more points will be involved in the
judgment of potential tree tops in the ﬁne segmentation stage,
and more may be recognized as tree tops. On the contrary, the
larger the window size, the fewer local density maximum points
are detected and the fewer may be recognized as tree top points.
F1-scores remain relatively stable in plots 2 and 4 but show a
decreasing trend when the window size is 10, whereas, there is
a continuous increasing trend in plots 3 and 5. This may be due
to the fact that the trees in plots 3 and 5 have more complex
branch interference and require a larger window size to avoid
oversegmentation.Therefore,inscenarioswheretreesaredenser
and there are more short trees, this parameter can be set appro-
priately smaller to ensure that more trees can be detected. In
scenarios with more interference, the parameter can be increased
appropriately.
VI. CONCLUSION
This article proposed an individual tree segmentation method
based on region growing algorithm and density information
guided 3-D point cloud analysis, using UAV LiDAR point cloud
data. First, on the basis of CHM coarse segmentation based on
theregiongrowingalgorithm,thepointclouddensityfeaturewas
introduced to identify the wrong coarse segmentation segment.
Second,theheightanddensityinformationwithinthesegmented
trees was combined to guide the selection of 3-D spatial proﬁles.
Then, according to the spatial distribution pattern among the
trees, 3-D spatial analysis of the point cloud was carried out
to reﬁne the potential tree top location. Finally, the improved
tree top location was utilized as a regional growth seed point
to complete the ﬁne segmentation. We validated the accuracy
and robustness of the method on German forests and compared
it with the other ﬁve methods. The results indicated that the
average F1-scores of six study plots were 0.95, which improved
by 5% after the introduction of density information. Without
storing the point cloud, the algorithm ran in a few seconds. The


8908
IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN APPLIED EARTH OBSERVATIONS AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 18, 2025
method based on density information-guided 3-D point cloud
analysis can quickly and accurately locate potential tree tops,
which greatly improves the accuracy of tree detection, but it is
less effective in broadleaf forests with more complex canopy
structures. In the future, our work will focus on methods for
distinguishing between tree tops and branch points in vertical
proﬁleanalysis,aswellasautomaticallydeterminingtheoptimal
parameters.
REFERENCES
[1] W. Li et al., “Human ﬁngerprint on structural density of forests globally,”
Nature Sustain., vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 368–379, 2023.
[2] T. R. H. Goodbody, N. C. Coops, and J. C. White, “Digital aerial pho-
togrammetry for updating area-based forest inventories: A review of op-
portunities, challenges, and future directions,” Curr. Forestry Rep., vol. 5,
no. 2, pp. 55–75, Jun. 2019.
[3] J. T. Yang, Z. Z. Kang, S. Cheng, Z. Yang, and P. H. Akwensi, “An
individual tree segmentation method based on watershed algorithm and
three-dimensional spatial distribution analysis from airborne LiDAR point
clouds,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 13,
pp. 1055–1067, 2020.
[4] A. Kangas and M. Maltamo, Forest Inventory: Methodology and Applica-
tions. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag, 2006.
[5] P. Krzystek, A. Serebryanyk, C. Schnörr, J. Cervenka, and M. Heurich,
“Large-scale mapping of tree species and dead trees in Sumava Na-
tional Park and Bavarian Forest National Park using LiDAR and
multispectral imagery,” Remote Sens., vol. 12, no. 4, Feb. 2020,
Art. no. 661.
[6] F. E. Fassnacht et al., “Review of studies on tree species classiﬁcation
from remotely sensed data,” Remote Sens. Environ., vol. 186, pp. 64–87,
Dec. 2016.
[7] W. Q. Yan, H. Y. Guan, L. Cao, Y. T. Yu, C. Li, and J. Y. Lu, “A self-adaptive
mean shift tree-segmentation method using UAV LiDAR data,” Remote
Sens., vol. 12, no. 3, Feb. 2020, Art. no. 515.
[8] B. Bigdeli, H. A. Amirkolaee, and P. Pahlavani, “DTM extraction un-
der forest canopy using LiDAR data and a modiﬁed invasive weed
optimization algorithm,” Remote Sens. Environ., vol. 216, pp. 289–300,
Oct. 2018.
[9] Z. Y. Hui, S. G. Jin, Y. P. Xia, Y. J. Nie, X. W. Xie, and N. Li, “A
mean shift segmentation morphological ﬁlter for airborne LiDAR DTM
extraction under forest canopy,” Opt. Laser Technol., vol. 136, Apr. 2021,
Art. no. 106728.
[10] D. Wang, “Unsupervised semantic and instance segmentation of forest
point clouds,” ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 165, pp. 86–97,
Jul. 2020.
[11] K. L. Cook, “An evaluation of the effectiveness of low-cost UAVs and
structure from motion for geomorphic change detection,” Geomorphology,
vol. 278, pp. 195–208, Feb. 2017.
[12] A. P. Dalla Corte et al., “Measuring individual tree diameter and
height using GatorEye high-density UAV-LiDAR in an integrated crop-
livestock-forest system,” Remote Sens., vol. 12, no. 5, Mar. 2020,
Art. no. 863.
[13] R. Neuville, J. S. Bates, and F. Jonard, “Estimating forest structure from
UAV-mounted LiDAR point cloud using machine learning,” Remote Sens.,
vol. 13, no. 3, Feb. 2021, Art. no. 352.
[14] F. Moradi, F. D. Javan, and F. Samadzadegan, “Potential evaluation of
visible-thermal UAV image fusion for individual tree detection based on
convolutionalneuralnetwork,”Int.J.Appl.EarthObserv.Geoinf.,vol.113,
Sep. 2022, Art. no. 103011.
[15] N. C. Swayze, W. T. Tinkham, J. C. Vogeler, and A. T. Hudak, “In-
ﬂuence of ﬂight parameters on UAS-based monitoring of tree height,
diameter, and density,” Remote Sens. Environ., vol. 263, Sep. 2021,
Art. no. 112540.
[16] J. Zörner, J. Dymond, J. Shepherd, S. Wiser, and B. Jolly, “LiDAR-based
regional inventory of tall trees—Wellington, New Zealand,” Forests, vol. 9,
no. 11, Nov. 2018, Art. no. 702.
[17] M. Dalponte and D. A. Coomes, “Tree-centric mapping of forest carbon
density from airborne laser scanning and hyperspectral data,” Methods
Ecol. Evol., vol. 7, no. 10, pp. 1236–1245, Oct. 2016.
[18] S. Hartling, V. Sagan, and M. Maimaitijiang, “Urban tree species classiﬁ-
cation using UAV-based multi-sensor data fusion and machine learning,”
GISci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 8, pp. 1250–1275, Nov. 2021.
[19] H. M. Qin, W. Q. Zhou, Y. Yao, and W. M. Wang, “Individual tree
segmentationandtreespeciesclassiﬁcationinsubtropicalbroadleafforests
using UAV-based LiDAR, hyperspectral, and ultrahigh-resolution RGB
data,” Remote Sens. Environ., vol. 280, Oct. 2022, Art. no. 113143.
[20] Q. D. Chen et al., “Individual tree segmentation and tree height estimation
using leaf-off and leaf-on UAV-LiDAR data in dense deciduous forests,”
Remote Sens., vol. 14, no. 12, Jun. 2022, Art. no. 2787.
[21] Q. Chen, D. Baldocchi, P. Gong, and M. Kelly, “Isolating individual trees
in a savanna woodland using small footprint lidar data,” Photogramm. Eng.
Remote Sens., vol. 72, no. 8, pp. 923–932, Aug. 2006.
[22] T. Y. Dong, Q. Z. Zhou, S. B. Gao, and Y. Shen, “Automatic detection of
single trees in airborne laser scanning data through gradient orientation
clustering,” Forests, vol. 9, no. 6, Jun. 2018, Art. no. 291.
[23] K. S. Ma, Y. J. Xiong, F. G. Jiang, S. Chen, and H. Sun, “A novel vegetation
point cloud density tree-segmentation model for overlapping crowns using
UAV LiDAR,” Remote Sens., vol. 13, no. 8, Apr. 2021, Art. no. 1442.
[24] W. Q. Yan, H. Y. Guan, L. Cao, Y. T. Yu, S. Gao, and J. Y. Lu, “An
automated hierarchical approach for three-dimensional segmentation of
single trees using UAV LiDAR data,” Remote Sens., vol. 10, no. 12,
Dec. 2018, Art. no. 1999.
[25] H. Lee, K. C. Slatton, B. E. Roth, and W. P. Cropper, “Adaptive clustering
of airborne LiDAR data to segment individual tree crowns in managed
pine forests,” Int. J. Remote Sens., vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 117–139, 2010.
[26] W. K. Li, Q. H. Guo, M. K. Jakubowski, and M. Kelly, “A new method for
segmenting individual trees from the LiDAR point cloud,” Photogramm.
Eng. Remote Sens., vol. 78, no. 1, pp. 75–84, Jan. 2012.
[27] J. Vauhkonen et al., “Comparative testing of single-tree detection algo-
rithms under different types of forest,” Forestry, vol. 85, no. 1, pp. 27–40,
Jan. 2012.
[28] Y. Wang et al., “A novel method based on kernel density for estimating
crown base height using UAV-borne LiDAR data,” IEEE Geosci. Remote
Sens. Lett., vol. 19, 2022, Art. no. 7004105.
[29] W. X. Dai, B. S. Yang, Z. Dong, and A. Shaker, “A new method for
3D individual tree extraction using multispectral airborne LiDAR point
clouds,” ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 144, pp. 400–411,
Oct. 2018.
[30] W. Chen, X. B. Hu, W. Chen, Y. F. Hong, and M. H. Yang, “Airborne
LiDAR remote sensing for individual tree forest inventory using trunk
detection-aided mean shift clustering techniques,” Remote Sens., vol. 10,
no. 7, Jul. 2018, Art. no. 1078.
[31] A. Ferraz et al., “3-D mapping of a multi-layered Mediterranean forest
using ALS data,” Remote Sens. Environ., vol. 121, pp. 210–223, Jun. 2012.
[32] M. Latella, F. Sola, and C. Camporeale, “A density-based algorithm for
the detection of individual trees from LiDAR data,” Remote Sens., vol. 13,
no. 2, Jan. 2021, Art. no. 322.
[33] J. Williams et al., “3D Segmentation of trees through a ﬂexible multiclass
graph cut algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 2,
pp. 754–776, Feb. 2020.
[34] Z. Y. Hui, P. G. Cheng, B. S. Yang, and G. Q. Zhou, “Multi-level
self-adaptive individual tree detection for coniferous forest using air-
borne LiDAR,” Int. J. Appl. Earth Observ. Geoinf., vol. 114, Nov. 2022,
Art. no. 103028.
[35] H. Weiser, J. Schäfer, L. Winiwarter, N. Krasovec, F. E. Fassnacht, and
B. Höﬂe, “Individual tree point clouds and tree measurements from multi-
platform laser scanning in German forests,” Earth Syst. Sci. Data, vol. 14,
no. 7, pp. 2989–3012, Jul. 2022.
[36] W. M. Zhang et al., “An easy-to-use airborne LiDAR data ﬁltering method
based on cloth simulation,” Remote Sens., vol. 8, no. 6, Jun. 2016,
Art. no. 501.
[37] Q. Chen, W. Xie, P. Zhou, C. S. Zheng, and D. Wu, “Multi-crop convo-
lutional neural networks for fast lung nodule segmentation,” IEEE Trans.
Emerg. Topics Comput. Intell., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 1190–1200, Oct. 2022.
[38] M. Dalponte, “itcSegment: Individual tree crowns segmentation,” Aug.
22, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=
itcSegment
[39] Z. Zhen, L. J. Quackenbush, and L. J. Zhang, “Impact of tree-oriented
growthorderinmarker-controlledregiongrowingforindividualtreecrown
delineation using airborne laser scanner (ALS) data,” Remote Sens., vol. 6,
no. 1, pp. 555–579, Jan. 2014.
[40] K. Sterenczak, B. Kraszewski, M. Mielcarek, Z. Piasecka, M. Lisiewicz,
and M. Heurich, “Mapping individual trees with airborne laser scanning
data in an European lowland forest using a self-calibration algorithm,” Int.
J. Appl. Earth Observ. Geoinf., vol. 93, Dec. 2020, Art. no. 102191.
[41] Y. Pang et al., “Nyström-based spectral clustering using airborne LiDAR
point cloud data for individual tree segmentation,” Int. J. Digit. Earth,
vol. 14, no. 10, pp. 1452–1476, Oct. 2021.


LI et al.: INDIVIDUAL TREE SEGMENTATION BASED ON REGION-GROWING AND DENSITY-GUIDED
8909
[42] S. L. Tao et al., “Segmenting tree crowns from terrestrial and mobile
LiDAR data by exploring ecological theories,” ISPRS J. Photogramm.
Remote Sens., vol. 110, pp. 66–76, Dec. 2015.
[43] A. Ferraz, S. Saatchi, C. Mallet, and V. Meyer, “LiDAR detection of
individual tree size in tropical forests,” Remote Sens. Environ., vol. 183,
pp. 318–333, Sep. 2016.
[44] M. Rahman and B.G.H. Gorte, “Tree crown delineation from high reso-
lution airborne LiDAR based on densities of high points,” in Proc. ISPRS
Workshop Laserscanning, 2009, pp. 123–128.
[45] Y. Wang et al., “International benchmarking of the individual tree detection
methods for modeling 3-D canopy structure for silviculture and forest
ecology using airborne laser scanning,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 54, no. 9, pp. 5011–5027, Sep. 2016.
[46] H. K. You, S. H. Li, Y. F. Xu, Z. He, and D. Wang, “Tree extraction from
airborne laser scanning data in urban areas,” Remote Sens., vol. 13, no. 17,
Sep. 2021, Art. no. 3428.
Shihua Li (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
and M.S. degrees from Northwest A&F University,
Yangling, China, in 1998 and 2001, respectively, and
the Ph.D. degree in cartography and geographic infor-
mation system from the Institute of Remote Sensing
Applications, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
China, in 2007.
From 2001 to 2004, he was a Lecturer with
South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou,
China. He is currently a Professor with the Univer-
sity of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
Chengdu, China. His research interests include vegetation remote sensing and
land use and land cover monitoring.
Shunda Zhao received the B.S. degree in space infor-
mation and digital technology and the M.S. degree in
surveying and mapping from the University of Elec-
tronic and Technology of China, Chengdu, China, in
2021 and 2024, respectively.
His research interests include classiﬁcation and
parameter retrieval in forest scenes using lidar tech-
nology.
ZhilinTianreceivedtheB.S.degreeingeographicin-
formation science from Southwest Petroleum Univer-
sity, Chengdu, China, in 2020, and the M.S. degree in
surveying and mapping from the University of Elec-
tronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, in
2023.
His research interests include classiﬁcation and
parameter retrieval in forest scenes using LiDAR
technology.
Hao Tang (Student Member, IEEE) is currently
working toward the B.S. degree in geoinformation
science and technology from the University of Elec-
tronic and Technology of China, Chengdu, China.
His research interests include terrestrial laser scan-
ning and backpack laser scanning point cloud feature
extraction.
Zhonghua Su received the B.S. degree in remote
sensing science and technology and M.S. degree in
surveying and mapping from the Chengdu University
of Information Technology, Chengdu, China, in 2014
and 2019, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in in-
formation and communication engineering from the
University of Electronic and Technology of China,
Chengdu, in 2023.
From2021to2022,shewasavisitingscholarunder
thesupervisionofProf.Kai-KuangMa(IEEEFellow)
with Nanyang University of Technology. She is cur-
rently a Lecturer with the School of Computer and Software Engineering, Xihua
University,Chengdu,China.Herresearchinterestsincludefeatureextractionand
3-D reconstruction of LiDAR point cloud data.
