Remote Sensing of Environment 319 (2025) 114618
Available online 1 February 2025
0034-4257/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Remote Sensing of Environment
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/rse
Individual tree crown delineation in high resolution aerial RGB imagery
using StarDist-based model
Fei Tong ∗, Yun Zhang
Department of Geodesy and Geomatics Engineering, University of New Brunswick, 15 Dineen Drive, Fredericton, NB E3B 5A3, Canada
A R T I C L E
I N F O
Edited by Marie Weiss
Keywords:
Deep learning
Image segmentation
StarDist
Tree crown delineation
Star-convex polygon
A B S T R A C T
The availability of high spatial resolution remote sensing imagery has facilitated forestry attribute estimation
at the individual tree level. However, producing accurate tree crown delineations for practical applications
remains challenging, particularly in mixed forests with overlapping tree crowns. In this study, we propose an
individual tree crown delineation method leveraging the StarDist model to improve the delineation accuracy in
mixed forests. The StarDist model captures tree crown shapes uniquely through star-convex polygons, which
are predicted by the U-Net architecture. The final tree crowns are determined by applying non-maximum
suppression (NMS) to all identified star-convex polygons. Performance evaluation on two mixed forest areas
reveals a delineation accuracy exceeding 92%, notably outperforming the widely used deep learning model
MASK R-CNN by over 6%. In terms of tree crown areas estimation, the 𝑅2 for both testing areas is higher
than 0.85 for both testing areas. Moreover, the evaluations on precision, recall, and F1-score demonstrate that
the proposed model can generate tree crowns fitting well with the true crowns. This study marks the first
utilization of the StarDist model for tree crown delineation in mixed forests. Our findings demonstrate the
effectiveness of the StarDist model for accurately delineating individual tree crowns, thereby advancing the
field of forestry research.
1. Introduction
Accurately estimating forestry attributes is crucial for effective for-
est management and assessing the impacts of climate change. In recent
years, there has been a growing interest in automatically estimating
these attributes from remote sensing imagery due to the high cost and
time associated with traditional field surveys. Compared to pixel-based
estimation methods, individual tree-based approaches offer the poten-
tial for higher accuracy by providing more detailed information on
individual trees. Well-delineated tree crowns are helpful for improving
the estimation accuracy of forestry attributes like crown cover (Bai
et al., 2005), crown size (Zhang et al., 2010), diameter of breast height
(DBH) (Dalponte et al., 2018), and biomass (Graves et al., 2018).
However, automatically delineating individual tree crowns from remote
sensing imagery remains a challenging task.
For automated delineation of individual tree crowns, two categories
of methods have been developed: traditional approaches and deep
learning-based approaches. According to the review by Ke and Quack-
enbush (2011), traditional tree crown delineation approaches can be
categorized into three main types: valley following, region growing,
and watershed segmentation. Valley following relies on shaded gaps
within the forest to delineate tree crowns (Gougeon et al., 1998).
∗Corresponding author.
E-mail address: ftong@unb.ca (F. Tong).
While it performs well in mature coniferous stands, its accuracy dimin-
ishes in self-shaded tree crowns or challenging forest conditions where
detecting shaded gaps becomes problematic. Region growing is also
widely used for tree crown delineation. It usually utilizes the spectral
characteristics of tree crowns to conduct the delineation (Culvenor,
2002; Erikson, 2003; Ferreira et al., 2014; Gu and Congalton, 2021).
Typically, the region growing algorithm requires seed points to start
growing and criteria to stop growing. To get accurate seed points,
it usually requires to detect treetops. However, accurately detecting
treetops in complex mixed forests is difficult. To get optimal crite-
ria to stop growing, optimal thresholds are always required to be
manually determined. However, selecting a forest-wide threshold is
difficult, especially for complex mixed forests. Watershed segmentation
approaches are mostly conducted based on the edge information in the
image. However, the performance of the tree crown delineation is neg-
atively affected by the noise in the image, resulting in over-segmented
tree crowns.
To improve traditional watershed segmentation, two groups of ap-
proaches were proposed to avoid over-segmentation in results. The first
group of approaches is multiscale analysis. Jing et al. (2012) conducted
multiscale watershed segmentation based on images smoothed by three
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2025.114618
Received 20 September 2024; Received in revised form 30 December 2024; Accepted 21 January 2025


Remote Sensing of Environment 319 (2025) 114618
2
F. Tong and Y. Zhang
dominant scales of Gaussian filters. Then optimal delineations were se-
lected from the results of different scales. However, the three dominant
scales may not adequately capture the variability in real tree crown
scales. Yang et al. (2014) conducted watershed segmentation based on
the calculated gradient image. Then multiscale thresholds were adopted
to generate multiscale delineations. The final segmentation was deter-
mined by automatically selecting the tree crown in the optimal scale.
However, since it is difficult to get the optimal scale for every tree
crown, the delineation result still had a lot of over-segmented tree
crowns. The second group of approaches to mitigate over-segmentation
is marker-controlled watershed segmentation, where markers are de-
tected treetops based on local maxima detection. Wang et al. (2004)
and Wang (2010) detected two different types of treetops, spectral
local maxima and spatial local maxima. Since both types of treetops
were not perfect, the final treetops were spectral local maxima refined
by spatial local maxima. Lamar et al. (2005) and Tong et al. (2021)
utilized the spatial local maxima to detect treetops. After adding tree-
tops as markers for watershed segmentation, the over-segmentations
are effectively reduced. However, treetop detection always requires
accurate tree crown border information, which is difficult to obtain
using traditional image processing methods. Except for commonly used
delineation approaches, Wagner et al. (2018) conducted tree crown
delineation using mathematical morphological operations to achieve
high delineation accuracy in a highly diverse tropical forest. However,
since this method requires multiple manually assigned parameters, it
is unsure that this method can work well for the delineations using
different datasets.
More recently, deep learning-based approaches has been developed
for the tree crown delineation task (Zhao et al., 2023; Ozdarici-ok
and Ok, 2023; Li et al., 2023; Straker et al., 2023; Dersch et al.,
2024). One category of deep learning approaches combined deep learn-
ing with watershed segmentation. For instance, Lassalle et al. (2022)
utilized a CNN model to compute the distance map indicating pix-
els’ distances to the nearest tree crown borders. Subsequently, tree-
tops were identified by locating local maxima in the distance map,
and marker-controlled watershed segmentation was applied to pro-
duce the final delineation outcome based on the distance map and
detected treetops. Similarly, Freudenberg et al. (2022) utilized the U-
Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015) to predict the tree crown mask, tree
crown outlines, and the distance map. The watershed segmentation was
then performed based on a combination of these outputs. These ap-
proaches leverage deep learning to generate the necessary information
for marker-controlled watershed segmentation, resulting in superior
performance compared to traditional watershed segmentation algo-
rithms. Another category of deep learning approaches adopts instance
segmentation techniques. Specifically, MASK-RCNN (He et al., 2017) is
the most widely used deep learning model for tree crown delineation
research (Braga et al., 2020; Hao et al., 2021; Dersch et al., 2023; Ball
et al., 2023). Braga et al. (2020) adopted the MASK R-CNN to perform
tree crown detection and delineation on high-resolution satellite images
from tropical forests. Hao et al. (2021) utilized the MASK R-CNN to
detect discontinuous tree crowns and predict tree heights on UAV
imagery. Dersch et al. (2023) evaluated the performance of MASK R-
CNN for delineating tree crowns on UAV imagery collected from a
mixed forest stand. Ball et al. (2023) built a model called Detectree2
based on the Mask R-CNN to delineate tree crowns in on airborne RGB
imagery collected from tropical forests.
Overall, deep learning-based delineation methods usually outper-
form traditional approaches, as they leverage training samples and
excel at extracting information from imagery. However, several chal-
lenges remain in deep learning-based delineation methods. For the
methods combining deep learning with watershed segmentation, since
watershed segmentation often requires post-processing, such as noise
removal or determination of markers, some manually assigned hyper-
parameters are required. Finding optimal values for these hyperpa-
rameters can be challenging and inconsistent across different images
or environments. Although instance segmentation can avoid extra hy-
perparameters, it still has some problems. In instance segmentation
methods like MASK R-CNN, the Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS)
process is adopted to suppress redundant detections. However, because
NMS relies on axis-aligned bounding boxes that do not accurately
reflect the true shapes of tree crowns, it can result in incorrect delin-
eation, especially when tree crowns overlap. Moreover, annotating tree
crowns in dense mixed forests for the training of deep learning models
is also challenging. Since some tree crowns in the collected imagery are
indistinguishable, especially when only RGB images are available, it is
difficult to accurately annotate all tree crowns in the imagery.
According to the review of existing approaches for tree crown
delineation, we propose a robust and efficient tree crown delineation
method based on the StarDist model (Schmidt et al., 2018), which was
initially developed for cell nuclei segmentation in microscopy images.
The proposed StarDist-based model focus on overcoming the problems
existing in instance segmentation methods:
1. Instead of commonly-used axis-aligned bounding boxes that fail
to accurately capture tree crown shapes, star-convex polygons,
which fit the characteristics of tree crowns, are adopted to
improve delineation accuracy.
2. Given the challenge of annotating all tree crowns in an image
for training, we modify the loss function to allow the StarDist
model to be trained with sparsely annotated tree crowns.
Since star-convex polygons can accurately capture the shapes of most
tree crowns, the proposed method can generate more accurate delin-
eation results in mixed forests. Additionally, because the model can
be trained with sparsely annotated tree crowns, it is easily applicable
to mixed forests for delineation. To evaluate the performance of our
StarDist-based model, we applied it to delineate individual tree crowns
in a complex mixed forest using commonly available RGB aerial im-
agery and assessed its accuracy with multiple tree crown delineation
evaluation metrics. Compared to the widely recognized benchmark
model MASK R-CNN, our StarDist-based model achieved an accuracy
improvement of over 6% across two testing areas containing more
than five different tree species. Furthermore, we analyze the impact
of hyperparameters and imagery spatial resolutions on delineation
accuracy to provide guidance for future users in applying the proposed
model in delineation tasks.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section 2 provides the
description of study sites, details of the proposed tree crown delineation
method, and the introduction of tree crown delineation evaluation
metrics. The experimental results are presented in Section 3, includ-
ing the description of the delineation results, analysis of delineation
errors, and the comparison with other methods. Section 4 analyzes the
parameter settings of the proposed delineation method, analyzes the
effect of spatial resolution, explores perspectives for forest research,
and suggests possible further improvements. Section 5 provides the
overall conclusion for the research.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Study site
The study site selected for this research is within the Acadia Re-
search Forest (ARF) located in New Brunswick, Canada (as shown in
Fig. 1). The forest comprises approximately 9000 hectares of mixed
forest containing softwood, hardwood, and mixed-wood stands. Among
the predominant tree species in the forest are: (1) black and red
spruce, (2) white, red and jack pine, (3) balsam fir, (4) red and sugar
maple, (5) white, gray and yellow birch, (6) eastern hemlock, and
(7) eastern white cedar. The climate in the ARF is characterized by
a blend of maritime and continental influences, with slightly warmer
temperatures compared to surrounding areas owing to its proximity to
New Brunswick’s Grand Lake. The average growing season spans 91


Remote Sensing of Environment 319 (2025) 114618
3
F. Tong and Y. Zhang
Fig. 1. Training and testing areas in Acadia Research Forest. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this
article.)
days, with an annual precipitation averaging 1143.5 mm. Typically,
January is the coldest month, while July tends to be the warmest. In
ARF, one area with mixed tree species was selected for training, while
two additional areas were reserved for testing purposes, as shown in
Fig. 1. Testing area 1 is adjacent to the training area while testing
area 2 is located 1 km away from the raining area. The delineations
in this research were conducted based on the Aerial RGB images
collected on July 22, 2021. The RGB images were collected by the RGB
camera with 150 megapixel resolution in the Riegl VQ-1560i sensor.
The focal length of the camera lens is 50 mm and the field of view is
approximately 56.2◦× 43.7◦. Aside from the necessary pre-processing
to convert raw data into orthoimagery, no additional processing was
applied to enhance image quality. The spatial resolution of the collected
image is 15 cm, adequately meeting the requirements for tree crown
delineation. The training and testing ground truth tree crowns were
manually delineated based on the RGB image and the canopy height
model (CHM) image derived from LiDAR data collected in the same
time period. It is important to note that some tree crowns in the
forest were indistinguishable to human eyes. To minimize errors in
manual delineation, most of the selected ground truth tree crowns
were from the forest’s dominant layer, where tree crowns are more
distinguishable. Within the training area, a total of 1514 tree crowns
were manually annotated, while in the two testing areas, 1135 and
652 tree crowns were respectively annotated for validation. In the
bottom row of the Fig. 1, two subsections from each area are cropped
to show manually annotated tree crowns. The dominant tree species
in selected training and testing areas include red maple, white birch,
balsam fir, black and red spruce, and white pine. To provide insight
into the variation of tree crown sizes across all study areas, histograms
illustrating tree crown sizes are presented in Fig. 2.
2.2. Tree crown delineation based on StarDist model
Although the MASK R-CNN model has been widely used in tree
crown delineation tasks, since the axis-aligned bounding boxes cannot


Remote Sensing of Environment 319 (2025) 114618
4
F. Tong and Y. Zhang
Fig. 2. Histograms of tree crown sizes for training and testing areas.
Fig. 3. Incorrect delineations caused by axis-aligned bounding boxes.
accurately represent the shape of tree crowns, some incorrect delin-
eations could be generated in mixed forest. For the image in the first
row of Fig. 3, the bounding box for the crown 1 caused the omission of
the crown 2. For the image in the second row of Fig. 3, the bounding
box for the crown 1 caused the irregular shape of the crown 2.
In this research, to accurately delineate tree crowns in mixed forests,
the StarDist model that performed well on cell segmentation (Schmidt
et al., 2018) is adopted to segment tree crowns. When the StarDist
model was proposed, it used star-convex polygons to approximate the
typically roundish shapes of cell nuclei in microscopy images. Since
most tree crowns also have roundish shapes, the star-convex polygons
can well approximate tree crowns in remote sensing imagery. The
StarDist model comprises two primary components: (1) tree crown
probability and tree crown shape prediction, (2) tree crown determi-
nation. Specifically, for each pixel (𝑖, 𝑗) in the image, the tree crown
probability 𝑝(𝑖, 𝑗) is the normalized Euclidean distance to the nearest
background pixel, and the shape of the tree crown centered at (𝑖, 𝑗)
is represented by distances {𝑑𝑘(𝑖, 𝑗)}𝑛
𝑘=1 to the boundary of the cor-
responding tree crown along a set of 𝑛predefined radial directions
with equidistant angles. An example of star-convex polygon with 16
radial distances is shown in Fig. 4. It can be observed that the poly-
gon recovered from radial distances can well match the contours of
the object, thus accurately representing the shape of the tree crown.
Moreover, unlike axis-aligned bounding boxes based methods, the sub-
sequent segmentation is not required. In this study, the 𝑛is set as
32 since it is sufficient to accurately describe most of the roundish
shapes (Schmidt et al., 2018; Hu et al., 2023). For the first component,
a simple U-Net architecture (Ronneberger et al., 2015) is trained for
prediction purposes. Subsequently, the second component utilizes non-
maximum suppression (NMS) (Hosang et al., 2017) on candidate tree
crowns to determine the final delineation. Further details regarding
each component are provided in the subsequent sections.
2.2.1. Tree crown probability and tree crown shapes determined by U-net
The U-Net utilized in the proposed tree crown delineation method
is illustrated in Fig. 5. The size of the input image tile is 256 × 256. For
the encoding part of the U-Net, the image size is progressively down-
sampled to 32 × 32 by a series of convolutional layers followed by max
pooling operations. In the decoding part, utilizing skip-connections,
convolution layers, and upsampling operations, the original spatial
resolution is reconstructed and high level features are extracted. Af-
ter U-Net feature extraction, the shape of the output feature map
is 256 × 256 × 32. To prevent contention for features among two
subsequent output layers, an additional 3 × 3 convolutional layer with
128 channels is adopted. A 32-channel convolutional layer with a
kernel size of 1 × 1 followed by linear activation is utilized to output


Remote Sensing of Environment 319 (2025) 114618
5
F. Tong and Y. Zhang
Fig. 4. An example of star-convex polygon: (a) a polygon represented by 16 radial distances; (b) polygon recovered from radial distances (blue line) and real polygon (red dash
line). (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Fig. 5. U-Net used for tree crown delineation.
radial distances {𝑑𝑘(𝑖, 𝑗)}𝑛
𝑘=1. A single-channel convolutional layer with
a kernel size of 1 × 1 followed by sigmoid activation is employed to
output the object probability 𝑝(𝑖, 𝑗). The loss function of the model
comprises two components, the object probability loss and the radial
distances loss. Assuming that the predicted pixel-wise object probability
and radial distances are ( ̂𝑝, { ̂𝑑𝑘}𝑛
𝑘=1), and ground-truths are (𝑝, {𝑑𝑘}𝑛
𝑘=1),
the loss function is defined as:
𝐿(𝑝, ̂𝑝, {𝑑𝑘}𝑛
𝑘=1, { ̂𝑑𝑘}𝑛
𝑘=1) = 𝐿𝑜𝑏𝑗(𝑝, ̂𝑝) + 𝜆𝐿𝑑 𝑖𝑠𝑡({𝑑𝑘}𝑛
𝑘=1, { ̂𝑑𝑘}𝑛
𝑘=1)
(1)
where 𝜆is empirically set as 0.2 as this value demonstrated excellent
performance in the original StarDist model1 for cell nuclei segmenta-
tion. The object probability loss 𝐿𝑜𝑏𝑗is calculated using the standard
binary cross-entropy function:
𝐿𝑜𝑏𝑗(𝑝, ̂𝑝) = −𝑝log ̂𝑝− (1 −𝑝) log(1 −̂𝑝)
(2)
1 https://github.com/stardist/stardist.
Meanwhile, the radial distances loss is calculated using the mean
absolute error weighted by the object probability:
𝐿𝑑 𝑖𝑠𝑡({𝑑𝑘}𝑛
𝑘=1, { ̂𝑑𝑘}𝑛
𝑘=1) = 𝑝⋅1
𝑛⋅
𝑛
∑
𝑘=1
|𝑑𝑘−̂𝑑𝑘|
(3)
Since radial distances loss is weighted by the object probability, the
accuracy of predictions near object centers is enhanced.
Since the probability loss 𝐿𝑜𝑏𝑗in original StarDist model considers
both object and background pixels, it requires fully annotated training
patches, in which every object is annotated. However, for the tree
crown delineation task, since some tree crowns in co-dominant or inter-
mediate layers are not distinguishable in the RGB imagery, only sparse
annotated tree crowns were available. Therefore, if original StarDist
model is trained with sparsely annotated tree crowns, only tree crowns
similar to training samples will have high object probability while other
tree crowns will have low object probabilities, which will negatively
affect the delineation performance. From the example training patches


Remote Sensing of Environment 319 (2025) 114618
6
F. Tong and Y. Zhang
Fig. 6. Sample image and outputs of U-Net: (a) input image; (b) original object probability map; (c) object probability map with 𝑝 > 0 constraint; (d) the convex-polygon represented
by radial distances for one pixel.
shown at the bottom of Fig. 1 (highlighted by purple rectangles), it is
evident that only portions of the tree crowns were annotated, while
other parts were treated as background. During training, the model
aims to increase the object probability for the annotated tree crowns
while reducing it for the background. However, some tree crowns in the
background closely resemble the annotated ones, confusing the model
and reducing the object probability for the annotated tree crowns. In
Fig. 6(b), it can be observed that trained with the original loss function,
only a few tree crowns in the center of the image have high object
probabilities, while other tree crowns have very low probabilities. To
optimize the object probability map, a constraint 𝑝 > 0 was added to
the probability loss 𝐿𝑜𝑏𝑗, which means the loss function is exclusively
computed based on annotated tree crowns (𝑝 > 0), with background
pixels (𝑝= 0) excluded from consideration. Since the model only con-
siders annotated tree crowns in the object loss function, the predicted
object probability by the trained model will be closely relevant to
the similarity between training tree crowns and testing tree crowns.
Therefore, if tree crowns in testing images are similar to annotated
training tree crowns, their object probabilities are high. As shown in
Fig. 6(c), most tree crowns have high object probabilities after adding
the constraint.
To train the U-Net model, two input images are required: (1) the
RGB image tile with the size of 256 × 256, and (2) the corresponding
mask image for ground truth tree crowns. The object probability and
radial distances were calculated from the mask image. The reference
object probability map was obtained by computing the normalized
Euclidean distance transform between each pixel and the borders of
the training tree crowns. The radial distances for each pixel were
obtained by computing its Euclidean distances to tree crown borders
in corresponding directions. Given that the image size of the training
area is 3611 × 3485, after tiling and excluding tiles without ground
truth, 165 tiles were preserved for training. Since the number of
training image tiles was insufficient, data augmentation was conducted
to expand the training set. The data augmentation includes random
rotations (90◦, 180◦, and 270◦), horizontal and vertical flips, and
random intensity change. The Adam optimizer with a learning rate of
0.0003 was adopted for training. The whole training process had 100
epochs with a batch size of 4. In each epoch, 100 training steps were
conducted based on the augmented training batch. The U-Net training
was carried out on a laptop equipped with an Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-
11800H @ 2.30 GHz processor, 16 GB of RAM, and an NVIDIA GeForce
RTX 3060 GPU with 6 GB of memory. The code was written and
executed on Python 3.8.19 using TensorFlow 2.10.0 and CUDA 11.2.
The total time cost for the training of the U-Net is 123 min.
2.3. Tree crown determination using non-maximum suppression
Following the U-Net prediction, every pixel in the image has an
object probability and 32 radial distances representing the shape of
the tree crown. Fig. 6(d) shows the output radial distances of one
pixel in the image, which determines the shape of the tree crown.
There is a candidate tree crown for every pixel in the image. However,
not all candidate tree crowns should be included in the final result.
Given that tree crown centers typically exhibit high object probabilities,
eliminating those with low probabilities is an effective way to remove
undesired tree crowns. Therefore, the initial step involves thresholding


Remote Sensing of Environment 319 (2025) 114618
7
F. Tong and Y. Zhang
Fig. 7. An example of tree crown determination and removal in NMS.
the object probabilities using 𝑇𝑐 𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑛= 0.5. Subsequently, as each pixel
within a real tree crown possesses its own shape prediction, it becomes
imperative to retain the most accurate representation while discarding
others. To achieve this, a standard greedy non-maximum suppression
(NMS) (Hosang et al., 2017) technique is employed. The specifics of the
non-maximum suppression are outlined below:
1. Sort all tree crowns by their object probabilities and form a
candidate tree crowns list.
2. Save the tree crown with the highest object probability in the
final result, and remove it from the candidate tree crowns list.
3. For the tree crown saved by step 2, compute its Intersection over
Union (IoU) to all of the rest tree crowns in the candidate tree
crowns list. If the IoU with a tree crown is higher than the pre-
determined threshold 𝑇𝐼 𝑜𝑈= 0.3, remove this tree crown from
the candidate tree crowns list.
4. If the candidate tree crowns list is empty, terminate the NMS
process. Otherwise, return to step 2 and repeat the procedure
from step 2 to step 3.
It is important to note that the IoU is calculated based on the true crown
polygons and predicted polygons represented by the radial distances.
Fig. 7 illustrates the application of NMS for removing redundant tree
crowns.
2.4. Tree crown delineation evaluation metrics
To conduct a comprehensive assessment for tree crown delineation
results, multiple evaluation metrics were selected from previously pub-
lished literatures. The first and the most important metric focused on
delineation accuracy. Assuming there are 𝑁reference tree crowns, the
number of correctly delineated tree crowns is 𝑛, delineation accuracy
is defined as:
𝐷 𝑒𝑙 𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝐴𝑐 𝑐 𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐 𝑦= 𝑛
𝑁
(4)
A tree crown is considered as correctly delineated when it share over
50% IoU with the reference tree crown (Lassalle et al., 2022). The IoU
is defined as:
IoU =
𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑎(𝐶𝑟𝑒𝑓∩𝐶𝑝𝑟𝑒)
𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑎(𝐶𝑟𝑒𝑓∪𝐶𝑝𝑟𝑒)
(5)
where 𝐶𝑟𝑒𝑓represents the reference tree crown and 𝐶𝑝𝑟𝑒represents the
predicted tree crown.
Over-segmented, under-segmented, and missed tree crowns are im-
portant sources of errors in tree crown delineation result. Since not all
the tree crowns in the image were selected as references, counting the
number of under-segmented tree crowns will be inaccurate. Therefore,
the number of over-segmented tree crowns and the number of missed
tree crowns were counted in this article to show the source of inaccu-
rate delineations. The definitions of over-segmented tree crowns and
missed tree crowns follow the descriptions in Jing et al. (2012):
1. over-segmented tree crown: if more than half the area of multi-
ple predicted crowns were covered by a single reference crown,
the reference crown is over-segmented in the automatic delin-
eation.
2. missed tree crown: if a reference crown covered more than
half the area of no predicted crown, the reference crown was
considered as a crown missed in the automatic delineation.
Measuring how well the predicted tree crowns fit reference tree
crowns is also important. For each correctly delineated tree crown
(IoU > 0.5), the Precision, Recall, and F1-score (Braga et al., 2020)
were calculated. The Precision is the ratio between the area of the
intersection and the area of the predicted crown. The Recall is the ratio
between the area of intersection and the area of reference crown. The
F1-score is calculated as:
F1 − scor e = 2 Pr ecision × Recall
Pr ecision + Recall
(6)
The final Precision, Recall, and F1-score for the delineation result
were calculated by averaging the Precision, Recall, and F1-score for
all correctly delineated tree crowns. Moreover, to show the agreement
between predicted tree crown areas and reference tree crown areas,
the coefficient of determination 𝑅2 and relative Root Mean Square
Error (rRMSE) of correctly delineated tree crowns were calculated. The
rRMSE is defined as:
r RMSE = RMSE
𝑎𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛
(7)
where 𝑎𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛represents the mean areas of reference tree crowns, and
RMSE is defined as:
RMSE =
√∑𝑛
𝑖=1( ̂𝑎𝑖−𝑎𝑖)2
𝑛
(8)
where ̂𝑎𝑖is the predicted tree crown area and 𝑎𝑖is the true tree crown
area.
2.5. Comparison with other methods
To validate the effectiveness of the proposed tree crown delineation
model, previously existing tree crown delineation methods were also
conducted on the same dataset for comparison. Since commonly used
unsupervised traditional tree crown delineation methods are not good
for complex mixed forests, only deep learning-based tree crown de-
lineation methods were considered. As mentioned in the introduction
section, conducting watershed segmentation based on the deep learning
derived distance map (Lassalle et al., 2022; Freudenberg et al., 2022)
can generate good delineation results. Therefore, the first method for
comparison was the U-Net+Watershed. To show the superiority of the
star-convex polygons, the distance map was predicted by the U-Net
used in the StarDist model. The distance map is the object probability
map in the StarDist model. First, the distance map was smoothed using
a 2D Gaussian filter with a 𝑠𝑖𝑔 𝑚𝑎value of 2. Next, treetops were
identified by finding the local maxima in the distance map. Finally,
watershed segmentation was applied based on the detected treetops and
the distance map to generate the delineation.
The second method is the MASK R-CNN, which was widely used for
tree crown delineation in recent years. The Mask R-CNN detects bound-
ing boxes for tree crowns first, and then perform the segmentation in
the bounding box to get the final tree crown. A faithful implementation
of MASK R-CNN in ArcGIS Pro 3.2.2 was adopted to segment tree
crowns. The training patches of the MASK R-CNN were the same as
those used in our proposed StarDist model. The batch size, number of
training epochs, and data augmentation strategy of the MASK R-CNN
were the same as those used in the StarDist.


Remote Sensing of Environment 319 (2025) 114618
8
F. Tong and Y. Zhang
Fig. 8. Delineation maps (red: predicted tree crowns, blue: reference tree crowns) of different methods from 3 subsections of the testing area 1. (For interpretation of the references
to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
3. Experiments
3.1. Delineation performance
To show the tree crown delineation performance, the delineation
accuracy, Precision, Recall, and F1-Score of delineation results were
calculated. In training area 1, 1055 out of 1135 reference tree crowns
were correctly delineated. In training area 2, 603 out of 652 refer-
ence tree crowns were correctly delineated. The delineation accuracy
reached 92.95% for testing area 1 and 92.48% for testing area 2. For the
metrics reflecting the fitness to true crowns, the F1-Scores for both test-
ing areas were higher than 0.88, which shown high agreement between
predicted and true tree crowns. These results validate the efficacy of
the proposed model in producing satisfactory delineations within mixed
forest environments. Examples of delineations in two testing areas are
shown in the third column of Figs. 8 and 9. It can be observed that
most of tree crowns were accurately delineated although the model was
trained with sparse tree crowns. The complete delineation maps for two
testing areas are provided as supplementary materials for this paper.
3.2. Comparison with other methods
To show the superiority of the proposed StarDist model, the delin-
eation accuracy, Precision, Recall, and F1-Score of three delineation
methods were listed in Table 1. For delineation accuracy, it can be
observed that the proposed StarDist model outperformed the other two
methods. Notably, StarDist achieved accuracy increases of 8.46% and
6.90% respectively on both testing areas compared to MASK R-CNN.
While the delineation accuracy of U-Net+Watershed reached 90.03%
in testing area 2, its F1-Score was notably lower compared to the other
two methods, indicating poorer alignment with true crowns. There
were no significant differences between MASK R-CNN and StarDist in
metrics Precision, Recall, and F1-Scores. While MASK R-CNN exhibited
higher Precision in testing area 1, StarDist demonstrated higher Preci-
sion in testing area 2. Regarding Recall and F1-Score, StarDist slightly
outperformed MASK R-CNN in both testing areas. Overall, StarDist
accurately identified more tree crowns than MASK R-CNN, with slightly
better performance in fitting to true crowns.
To facilitate a better comparison of delineation methods, delineation
maps from all methods for three subsections of both testing areas
are presented in Figs. 8 and 9. The results reveal that although U-
Net+Watershed successfully detected most tree crowns, its boundary


Remote Sensing of Environment 319 (2025) 114618
9
F. Tong and Y. Zhang
Fig. 9. Delineation maps (red: predicted tree crowns, blue: reference tree crowns) of different methods from 3 subsections of the testing area 2. (For interpretation of the references
to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
accuracy was inferior to the other two methods. Tree crowns delineated
by U-Net+Watershed often extended beyond the actual boundaries,
contributing to its lower Precision and higher Recall values shown
in Table 1. Additionally, large tree crowns were more prone to over-
segmentation with this method. Compared with the delineation maps
generated by MASK R-CNN, the proposed StarDist-based model gener-
ated more accurate delineations for overlapping and densely connected
tree crowns, highlighting the advantages of star-convex polygons over
axis-aligned bounding boxes. Furthermore, the proposed StarDist-based
model accurately detectd more small tree crowns than MASK R-CNN,
showcasing its superior capability in handling tree crowns of varying
sizes.
3.3. Delineation error analysis
To better understand the sources of incorrect delineations, the
numbers of over-segmented and missed tree crowns were counted and
listed in Table 2. StarDist exhibited the lowest number of missed and
over-segmented tree crowns in both testing areas. Compared to MASK
Table 1
Delineation accuracy, Precision, Recall and F1-Score for different methods.
Data
Metrics
U-Net
+Watershed
MASK R-CNN
StarDist
Testing
area 1
Delineation accuracy (%)
82.38
84.49
92.95
Precision
0.7085
0.9085
0.9014
Recall
0.9756
0.8604
0.8888
F1-Score
0.8140
0.8773
0.8897
Testing
area 2
Delineation accuracy (%)
90.03
85.58
92.48
Precision
0.7224
0.9069
0.9135
Recall
0.9719
0.8519
0.8725
F1-Score
0.8220
0.8713
0.8867
R-CNN, StarDist successfully reduced the number of missed and over-
segmented tree crowns in the delineation results. Specifically, in testing
area 1, StarDist showed 15 fewer over-segmented tree crowns and 82
fewer missed tree crowns compared to MASK R-CNN. In testing area 2,
StarDist had 17 fewer over-segmented tree crowns and 23 fewer missed


Remote Sensing of Environment 319 (2025) 114618
10
F. Tong and Y. Zhang
Table 2
Numbers of over-segmented and missed tree crowns.
Data
Reference
Error type
U-Net+Watershed
MASK R-CNN
StarDist
Testing area 1
1135
Over-segmented
40
35
20
Missed
167
135
53
Testing area 2
652
Over-segmented
27
29
12
Missed
48
57
34
Fig. 10. Histograms for incorrectly delineated tree crown areas (in pixels).
tree crowns than MASK R-CNN. Compared to MASK R-CNN, the U-
Net+Watershed method exhibited a higher number of over-segmented
and missed tree crowns in the delineation results of testing area 1,
and marginally fewer over-segmented and missed tree crowns in the
delineation results of testing area 2.
Additionally, Fig. 10 illustrates the distributions of incorrectly de-
lineated reference tree crown areas for different methods in the two
testing areas. Notably, in both testing areas, StarDist exhibits signifi-
cantly fewer incorrectly delineated tree crowns when the tree crown
area is less than 1000 compared to the other two methods. However,
when the tree crown area exceeds 1000, there is no noticeable differ-
ence between StarDist and MASK R-CNN. Thus, it can be concluded that
in the mixed forest with varying tree crown sizes, the proposed StarDist
surpassed MASK R-CNN in delineating smaller-sized tree crowns.
3.4. Correlation in crown areas
The quality of tree crown delineation can also be assessed by
examining the correlation between true and segmented crown sizes. For
all correctly delineated tree crowns with an IoU higher than 0.5, their
areas and corresponding true areas were analyzed, as shown in Fig. 11.
The first row of Fig. 11 illustrates the relationship between true and
predicted crown areas, while the second row displays the distribution of
area differences between true and predicted crowns. Across both testing
areas, a high coefficient of determination (𝑅2 ≥0.85) was observed.
Additionally, the r RMSE was calculated to be 21.0% for testing area 1
and 24.4% for testing area 2. The calculated r RMSE values are not very
low due to the wide range of tree crown sizes. Especially, errors from
a small number of large tree crowns significantly impacts the results.
Furthermore, as evident from the second row of Fig. 10, the majority
of area differences are centered around 0, with most falling within the
range of [−250, 250]. Overall, these analyses indicate a strong agreement
between the areas of true and predicted crowns.
4. Discussions
4.1. Parameters analysis
4.1.1. Effect of different 𝑇𝑐 𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑛on delineation accuracy
The 𝑇𝑐 𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑛used for extracting tree crown areas can affect the
delineation accuracy. In this section, the effect of different 𝑇𝑐 𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑛on
delineation accuracy is investigated. The candidate values of 𝑇𝑐 𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑛
were set as: [0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9]. The delineation accu-
racy with different 𝑇𝑐 𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑛was recorded and plotted in Fig. 12. The
results reveal that increasing 𝑇𝑐 𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑛will not obviously affect delineation
accuracy before 𝑇𝑐 𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑛reaches 0.7. However, a notable decrease in
delineation accuracy is observed when 𝑇𝑐 𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑛is raised from 0.7 to 0.8.
Further increasing 𝑇𝑐 𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑛to 0.9 results in a dramatic decrease in delin-
eation accuracy, by approximately 35% for both testing areas. Higher
values of 𝑇𝑐 𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑛lead to the exclusion of certain tree crowns within
the mixed forest, thus diminishing delineation accuracy. Conversely,
very low 𝑇𝑐 𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑛values, while maintaining high delineation accuracy,
result in the misidentification of background areas as tree crowns and
low prediction efficiency. Based on these observations, the proposed
StarDist model demonstrates a preference for a 𝑇𝑐 𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑛range of 0.5 to
0.7 to ensure optimal delineation accuracy.
4.1.2. Effect of different 𝑇𝐼 𝑜𝑈on delineation accuracy
The 𝑇𝐼 𝑜𝑈controlling the removal of tree crowns in the NMS pro-
cess also affects the delineation accuracy. In this section, the effects
of different 𝑇𝐼 𝑜𝑈([0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5]) on delineation accuracy are
investigated. The recorded delineation accuracy with different 𝑇𝐼 𝑜𝑈
for both testing areas is plotted in Fig. 13. Observations suggest that
delineation accuracy in both testing areas increased with higher 𝑇𝐼 𝑜𝑈
until 𝑇𝐼 𝑜𝑈reached 0.3. After reaching this threshold, further increases


Remote Sensing of Environment 319 (2025) 114618
11
F. Tong and Y. Zhang
Fig. 11. (First row) plotted true and predicted crown areas (in pixels), and (second row) area difference distribution between the true and predicted crowns (in pixels).
Fig. 12. Delineation accuracy with different 𝑇𝑐 𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑛.
in 𝑇𝐼 𝑜𝑈led to marginal or no improvements in delineation accuracy.
An appreciable enhancement in delineation accuracy (2.8% for testing
area 1 and 3.8% for testing area 2) was noticeable when 𝑇𝐼 𝑜𝑈increased
from 0 to 0.1. While a higher value of 𝑇𝐼 𝑜𝑈can yield improved
delineation accuracy, it also escalates the incidence of over-segmented
tree crowns due to the emergence of numerous small fragments in the
delineation result. Therefore, to balance the delineation accuracy and
over-segmentation error, the 𝑇𝐼 𝑜𝑈was set as 0.3 for both testing areas
in this research.
4.2. Effect of spatial resolution on delineation accuracy
Since the spatial resolution of the imagery can affect delineation ac-
curacy, this section investigates the effect of various spatial resolutions
(15 cm, 30 cm, and 60 cm) on delineation accuracy. The original im-
agery with a 15 cm spatial resolution was down-sampled to 30 cm and
60 cm. To maintain the same number of patches used in the training
process, patch sizes were set to 128 × 128 for the 30 cm resolution and
64 × 64 for the 60 cm resolution. The training and prediction processes


Remote Sensing of Environment 319 (2025) 114618
12
F. Tong and Y. Zhang
Fig. 13. Delineation accuracy with different 𝑇𝐼 𝑜𝑈.
Table 3
Delineation accuracy, Precision, Recall and F1-Score with different spatial resolutions.
Data
Metrics
60 cm
30 cm
15 cm
Testing area 1
Delineation accuracy (%)
58.15
88.02
92.95
Precision
0.8129
0.8299
0.9014
Recall
0.7760
0.8662
0.8888
F1-Score
0.7835
0.8393
0.8897
Testing area 2
Delineation accuracy (%)
66.87
84.82
92.48
Precision
0.8673
0.8480
0.9135
Recall
0.7700
0.8344
0.8725
F1-Score
0.8030
0.8316
0.8867
were then conducted on images with different spatial resolutions. The
delineation accuracy, Precision, Recall, and F1-Score of all delineations
are listed in Table 3. When the spatial resolution decreased from
15 cm to 30 cm, delineation accuracy dropped by 4.93% and 7.66%
for the two testing areas, respectively, with corresponding decreases
in Precision, Recall, and F1-Score. A further decrease from 30 cm to
60 cm resulted in dramatic accuracy drops: 29.87% for testing area 1
and 17.95% for testing area 2. In conclusion, the delineation with the
spatial resolution 15 cm is more accurate than those with lower spatial
resolutions.
4.3. Perspectives for forestry research
The proposed StarDist model requires high spatial resolution RGB
images as input, with the recommended resolution typically higher than
1 m. Beyond the aerial imagery utilized in this study, other image
sources such as high spatial resolution satellite imagery and high spatial
resolution UAV imagery can also be employed for delineation pur-
poses. Satellite imagery offers expansive coverage, making it suitable
for applications spanning large geographic areas. On the other hand,
UAV sensors can capture imagery with very high spatial resolution
(⩽10 cm) but have limited coverage. Therefore, the flexibility of our
proposed StarDist model accommodates various forestry applications
with differing spatial coverage requirements.
Efficiency of the model is an important issue for forestry appli-
cations. StarDist, as a deep learning model, requires a large number
of training samples, making the collection process time-consuming.
However, once sufficient training samples are available and the model
is trained, it can automatically delineate tree crowns over a large area
in a short time. In this research, manually delineating 1514 tree crowns
took approximately 28 h. However, once trained, the StarDist model
efficiently delineated over 20 000 tree crowns in two testing areas
within 2 min. This stark contrast in efficiency demonstrates the benefit
and power of deep learning model for tree crown delineation tasks,
making StarDist highly advantageous for forestry applications.
Our proposed StarDist model demonstrates the capability to ac-
curately delineate tree crowns within complex mixed forests, thereby
facilitating forestry research. Tree species classification holds signif-
icance in forestry research, as precise tree species distribution maps
support various applications such as resource inventories, biodiversity
assessment, hazard and stress management, and monitoring of inva-
sive species (Fassnacht et al., 2016). Several studies have underscored
the importance of accurately delineated tree crowns in enhancing
tree species classification accuracy (Korpela et al., 2011; Dalponte
et al., 2015; Wagner et al., 2018; Qin et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2023).
Therefore, the proposed StarDist model has the potential to enhance
tree species classification performance and its subsequent applications.
Furthermore, accurately delineated tree crowns contribute to improved
estimation of multiple forestry attributes, thereby facilitating climate
change monitoring and forest management. For instance, aboveground
biomass estimation plays a crucial role in climate change monitor-
ing (Kumar and Mutanga, 2017). Accurate tree crown delineation aids
in enhancing the estimation of aboveground biomass (Temesgen et al.,
2015; Graves et al., 2018; Dalponte et al., 2018). In conclusion, the
enhancement of tree crown delineation through our proposed StarDist
model can benefit multiple forest applications.
4.4. Possible improvements
The experiments in this research employed three RGB bands for de-
lineation. However, with only three RGB bands, most delineation meth-
ods struggle to accurately delineate tree crowns in the co-dominant or
intermediate forest layers, particularly when they are partially covered
by dominant layer crowns. Although the StarDist model may generate
incorrect delineations for these tree crowns, it has the potential to
incorporate additional spectral bands or the LiDAR-derived CHM band
to improve the delineation accuracy. Integrating more bands into the
StarDist model is straightforward by adjusting the input shape of the
U-Net. Given that supplementary information can enhance delineation
accuracy, further improvement can be achieved by using multispectral
or hyperspectral high spatial resolution imagery. Adding the CHM
band derived from LiDAR data is another option, while it involves
the complex registration problem with the RGB bands. Solving the
registration problem, combining the RGB bands and the CHM band in
the delineation will generate more accurate delineation results.
Improving the variation and size of the training set is another area
for enhancement. While this research conducted delineation within
a mixed forest for multiple tree species, the training process encom-
passed a limited number of tree crowns due to the significant time
and effort involved in collecting training tree crowns. It is antici-
pated that a more accurate delineation outcome could be achieved by
augmenting the training set with additional tree crowns. This augmen-
tation holds particular significance for instance segmentation methods,
where augmenting the training set can effectively mitigate the occur-
rence of missed objects in predictions. Furthermore, by incorporating
a comprehensive training set for tree crowns, it is envisaged that the
trained model can be utilized to produce a comprehensive wall-to-wall
delineation map spanning the entire forest.
5. Conclusion
This study introduces a novel method for automatically delineating
tree crowns on high spatial resolution remote sensing imagery. The
method employs deep learning to efficiently extract information from
the image. Different from to existing studies, the proposed model
utilizes star-convex polygons, which align closely with the natural
shapes of tree crowns, to accurately describe their contours. Training
with a small number of tree crowns, the proposed delineation method
accurately delineated tree crowns in two mixed forest testing areas.
It outperformed the widely used deep learning model MASK R-CNN


Remote Sensing of Environment 319 (2025) 114618
13
F. Tong and Y. Zhang
in delineation accuracy, especially for the delineation of smaller-sized
tree crowns. Given the critical importance of individual tree crown
delineation for various forestry applications, the proposed method
demonstrates promising potential for optimizing results across forestry
applications.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Fei Tong: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Soft-
ware, Methodology, Conceptualization. Yun Zhang: Writing – review
& editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.
Declaration of generative AI in scientific writing
During the preparation of this work, the authors used ChatGPT 3.5
in order to enhance the writing quality. After using this tool, the author
reviewed and edited the content as needed and take full responsibility
for the content of the publication.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Canadian Space Agency (CSA),
Canada [grant number 19FANBA36] and the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), Canada Discovery
Program [grant number RGPIN-2021-03164]. We would like to ac-
knowledge John McMullen from Natural Resources Canada, Atlantic
Forestry Centre for providing the data set and supporting us with forest
inventory information.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary material related to this article can be found online
at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2025.114618.
Data availability
The authors do not have permission to share data.
References
Bai, Y., Walsworth, N., Roddan, B., Hill, D., Broersma, K., Thompson, D., 2005.
Quantifying tree cover in the forest–grassland ecotone of british columbia using
crown delineation and pattern detection. For. Ecol. Manag. 212 (1–3), 92–100.
Ball, J.G., Hickman, S.H., Jackson, T.D., Koay, X.J., Hirst, J., Jay, W., Archer, M., Aubry-
Kientz, M., Vincent, G., Coomes, D.A., 2023. Accurate delineation of individual tree
crowns in tropical forests from aerial RGB imagery using mask R-CNN. Remote.
Sens. Ecol. Conserv. 9 (5), 641–655.
Braga, J.R., Peripato, V., Dalagnol, R., Ferreira, M.P., Tarabalka, Y., Aragão, L.E.,
de Campos Velho, H.F., Shiguemori, E.H., Wagner, F.H., 2020. Tree crown
delineation algorithm based on a convolutional neural network. Remote Sens. 12
(8), 1288.
Culvenor, D.S., 2002. TIDA: an algorithm for the delineation of tree crowns in high
spatial resolution remotely sensed imagery. Comput. Geosci. 28 (1), 33–44.
Dalponte, M., Ene, L.T., Marconcini, M., Gobakken, T., Næsset, E., 2015. Semi-
supervised SVM for individual tree crown species classification. ISPRS J.
Photogramm. Remote Sens. 110, 77–87.
Dalponte, M., Frizzera, L., Ørka, H.O., Gobakken, T., Næsset, E., Gianelle, D.,
2018. Predicting stem diameters and aboveground biomass of individual trees
using remote sensing data. Ecol. Indic. 85, 367–376.
http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.ecolind.2017.10.066, URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S1470160X17307033.
Dersch, S., Schöttl, A., Krzystek, P., Heurich, M., 2023. Towards complete tree crown
delineation by instance segmentation with mask R–CNN and DETR using UAV-based
multispectral imagery and lidar data. ISPRS Open J. Photogramm. Remote. Sens.
8, 100037.
Dersch, S., Schöttl, A., Krzystek, P., Heurich, M., 2024. Semi-supervised multi-class
tree crown delineation using aerial multispectral imagery and lidar data. ISPRS J.
Photogramm. Remote Sens. 216, 154–167.
Erikson, M., 2003. Segmentation of individual tree crowns in colour aerial photographs
using region growing supported by fuzzy rules. Can. J. Forest Res. 33 (8),
1557–1563.
Fassnacht, F.E., Latifi, H., Stereńczak, K., Modzelewska, A., Lefsky, M., Waser, L.T.,
Straub, C., Ghosh, A., 2016. Review of studies on tree species classifica-
tion from remotely sensed data. Remote Sens. Environ. 186, 64–87. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2016.08.013, URL:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0034425716303169.
Ferreira, M.P., Zanotta, D.C., Zortea, M., Körting, T.S., Fonseca, L.M.G.,
Shimabukuro, Y.E., Filho, C.R.S., 2014. Automatic tree crown delineation
in tropical forest using hyperspectral data. In: 2014 IEEE Geoscience
and Remote Sensing Symposium. Quebec City, QC, pp. 784–787.
http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/IGARSS.2014.6946541.
Freudenberg, M., Magdon, P., Nölke, N., 2022. Individual tree crown delineation in
high-resolution remote sensing images based on U-Net. Neural Comput. Appl. 34
(24), 22197–22207.
Gougeon, F.A., et al., 1998. Automatic individual tree crown delineation using a
valley-following algorithm and rule-based system. In: Proc. International Forum on
Automated Interpretation of High Spatial Resolution Digital Imagery for Forestry,
Victoria, British Columbia, Canada. pp. 11–23.
Graves, S.J., Caughlin, T.T., Asner, G.P., Bohlman, S.A., 2018. A tree-based approach to
biomass estimation from remote sensing data in a tropical agricultural landscape.
Remote Sens. Environ. 218, 32–43. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2018.09.009,
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0034425718304206.
Gu, J., Congalton, R.G., 2021. Individual tree crown delineation from UAS imagery
based on region growing by over-segments with a competitive mechanism. IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. 60, 1–11.
Hao, Z., Lin, L., Post, C.J., Mikhailova, E.A., Li, M., Chen, Y., Yu, K., Liu, J., 2021.
Automated tree-crown and height detection in a young forest plantation using mask
region-based convolutional neural network (mask R-CNN). ISPRS J. Photogramm.
Remote Sens. 178, 112–123.
He, K., Gkioxari, G., Dollár, P., Girshick, R., 2017. Mask R-CNN. In: 2017 IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision. ICCV, pp. 2980–2988. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/ICCV.2017.322.
Hosang, J., Benenson, R., Schiele, B., 2017. Learning non-maximum suppression. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
pp. 4507–4515.
Hu, L., Xu, X., Wang, J., Xu, H., 2023. Individual tree crown width detection from
unmanned aerial vehicle images using a revised local transect method. Ecol. Inform.
75, 102086.
Jing, L., Hu, B., Noland, T., Li, J., 2012. An individual tree crown delineation method
based on multi-scale segmentation of imagery. ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens.
70, 88–98.
Ke, Y., Quackenbush, L.J., 2011. A review of methods for automatic individual tree-
crown detection and delineation from passive remote sensing. Int. J. Remote Sens.
32 (17), 4725–4747.
Korpela, I., Heikkinen, V., Honkavaara, E., Rohrbach, F., Tokola, T., 2011. Variation
and directional anisotropy of reflectance at the crown scale—Implications for tree
species classification in digital aerial images. Remote Sens. Environ. 115 (8),
2062–2074.
Kumar, L., Mutanga, O., 2017. Remote sensing of above-ground biomass. Remote Sens.
9 (9), 935.
Lamar, W.R., McGraw, J.B., Warner, T.A., 2005. Multitemporal censusing of a popula-
tion of eastern hemlock (Tsuga canadensis L.) from remotely sensed imagery using
an automated segmentation and reconciliation procedure. Remote Sens. Environ.
94 (1), 133–143.
Lassalle, G., Ferreira, M.P., La Rosa, L.E.C., de Souza Filho, C.R., 2022. Deep
learning-based individual tree crown delineation in mangrove forests using very-
high-resolution satellite imagery. ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 189,
220–235.
Li, S., Brandt, M., Fensholt, R., Kariryaa, A., Igel, C., Gieseke, F., Nord-Larsen, T.,
Oehmcke, S., Carlsen, A.H., Junttila, S., et al., 2023. Deep learning enables image-
based tree counting, crown segmentation, and height prediction at national scale.
PNAS Nexus 2 (4), pgad076.
Ozdarici-ok, A., Ok, A.O., 2023. Using remote sensing to identify individual tree species
in orchards: A review. Sci. Hortic. 321, 112333.
Qin, H., Zhou, W., Yao, Y., Wang, W., 2022. Individual tree segmentation and tree
species classification in subtropical broadleaf forests using UAV-based LiDAR,
hyperspectral, and ultrahigh-resolution RGB data. Remote Sens. Environ. 280,
113143.
Ronneberger, O., Fischer, P., Brox, T., 2015. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomed-
ical image segmentation. In: Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted
Intervention–MICCAI 2015: 18th International Conference, Munich, Germany,
October 5-9, 2015, Proceedings, Part III 18. Springer, pp. 234–241.


Remote Sensing of Environment 319 (2025) 114618
14
F. Tong and Y. Zhang
Schmidt, U., Weigert, M., Broaddus, C., Myers, G., 2018. Cell detection with star-convex
polygons. In: Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention–
MICCAI 2018: 21st International Conference, Granada, Spain, September 16-20,
2018, Proceedings, Part II 11. Springer, pp. 265–273.
Straker, A., Puliti, S., Breidenbach, J., Kleinn, C., Pearse, G., Astrup, R., Magdon, P.,
2023. Instance segmentation of individual tree crowns with YOLOv5: A comparison
of approaches using the ForInstance benchmark LiDAR dataset. ISPRS Open J.
Photogramm. Remote. Sens. 9, 100045.
Temesgen, H., Affleck, D., Poudel, K., Gray, A., Sessions, J., 2015. A review of the
challenges and opportunities in estimating above ground forest biomass using
tree-level models. Scand. J. Res. 30 (4), 326–335.
Tong, F., Tong, H., Mishra, R., Zhang, Y., 2021. Delineation of individual tree crowns
using high spatial resolution multispectral WorldView-3 satellite imagery. IEEE J.
Sel. Top. Appl. Earth Obs. Remote. Sens. 14, 7751–7761.
Wagner, F.H., Ferreira, M.P., Sanchez, A., Hirye, M.C., Zortea, M., Gloor, E.,
Phillips, O.L., de Souza Filho, C.R., Shimabukuro, Y.E., Aragão, L.E., 2018.
Individual tree crown delineation in a highly diverse tropical forest using very high
resolution satellite images. ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 145, 362–377.
Wang, L., 2010. A multi-scale approach for delineating individual tree crowns with
very high resolution imagery. Photogramm. Eng. Remote Sens. 76 (4), 371–378.
Wang, L., Gong, P., Biging, G.S., 2004. Individual tree-crown delineation and treetop
detection in high-spatial-resolution aerial imagery. Photogramm. Eng. Remote Sens.
70 (3), 351–357.
Yang, J., He, Y., Caspersen, J., 2014. A multi-band watershed segmentation method for
individual tree crown delineation from high resolution multispectral aerial image.
In: Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium (IGARSS), 2014 IEEE International.
IEEE, pp. 1588–1591.
Yao, Z., Chai, G., Lei, L., Jia, X., Zhang, X., 2023. Individual tree species identification
and crown parameters extraction based on mask R-CNN: Assessing the applicability
of unmanned aerial vehicle optical images. Remote Sens. 15 (21), 5164.
Zhang, W., Ke, Y., Quackenbush, L.J., Zhang, L., 2010. Using error-in-variable regres-
sion to predict tree diameter and crown width from remotely sensed imagery. Can.
J. Res. 40 (6), 1095–1108.
Zhao, H., Morgenroth, J., Pearse, G., Schindler, J., 2023. A systematic review of
individual tree crown detection and delineation with convolutional neural networks
(CNN). Curr. Rep. 9 (3), 149–170.
